> Source: https://www.ijcai.org/Proceedings/16/Papers/104.pdf

Monte Carlo Tree Search in Continuous Action Spaces with Execution Uncertainty 
Timothy Yee, Viliam Lisý, Michael Bowling Department of Computing Science University of Alberta 
Edmonton, AB, Canada T6G 2E8 {tayee, lisy, bowling}@ualberta.ca 
Abstract Real world applications of artificial intelligence of-ten require agents to sequentially choose actions from continuous action spaces with execution un-certainty. When good actions are sparse, domain knowledge is often used to identify a discrete set of promising actions. These actions and their un-certain effects are typically evaluated using a re-cursive search procedure. The reduction of the problem to a discrete search problem causes severe limitations, notably, not exploiting all of the sam-pled outcomes when evaluating actions, and not us-ing outcomes to help find new actions outside the original set. We propose a new Monte Carlo tree search (MCTS) algorithm specifically designed for exploiting an execution model in this setting. Us-ing kernel regression, it generalizes the information about action quality between actions and to unex-plored parts of the action space. In a high fidelity simulator of the Olympic sport of curling, we show that this approach significantly outperforms exist-ing MCTS methods. 
1 Introduction Many real world problems involve selecting sequences of ac-tions from a continuous space of actions. Examples include choosing target motor velocities in robot navigation; choos-ing the angle, offset, and speed to hit a billiard ball; or choos-ing the angle, velocity, and rotation to throw a curling stone. Execution of these actions is often fundamentally uncertain due to limited human or robot skill and the stochastic nature of physical reality. In this paper, we focus on algorithms for choosing good actions in continuous action, continuous state, stochastic planning problems when a model of the execution uncertainty is known. 
One often-used approach [Smith, 2007; Archibald et al., 2009; Yamamoto et al., 2015] for such challenging planning problems is to address the continuous action space by us-ing domain knowledge to identify a small, discrete set of candidate actions. Then, the continuous space of stochas-tic outcomes is sampled for each action. Finally, for each sampled outcome, a heuristic function (possibly preceded by a very shallow search) is used to evaluate the outcomes 
and thus the original candidates. This approach reveals a tension between exploring a larger set of candidate actions to increase the probability that a good action is considered, and more accurately evaluating promising candidates through deeper search or more execution outcomes, increasing the probability the best candidate is selected. Monte Carlo tree search (MCTS) methods, such as UCT [Kocsis and Szepes-vari, 2006], are well suited for balancing this sort of tradeoff, however, many of the successful variants and enhancements are designed for finite, discrete action spaces. A number of recent advances have sought to address this shortcoming. The classical approach of progressive widening (or unprun-ing) [Coulom, 2007; Chaslot et al., 2008] can handle contin-uous action spaces by considering a slowly growing discrete set of sampled actions. cRAVE [Couëtoux et al., 2011] com-bines this with a modification of the RAVE heuristic [Gelly and Silver, 2011] to do generalization from similar (but not exactly the same) actions. HOOT [Mansley et al., 2011] re-places the UCB algorithm in UCT with HOO [Bubeck et al., 2011], an algorithm with theoretical guarantees in continuous action spaces. However, none of these methods make use of one critical insight: samples of execution uncertainty from a particular action provide information about any action that could have generated that execution outcome. 
We use this insight to propose a novel variant of Monte Carlo tree search, KR-UCT (Kernel Regression UCT), de-signed specifically for reasoning about continuous actions with execution uncertainty. Instead of evaluating only a dis-crete set of candidate actions, the algorithm considers the en-tire continuous space of actions, with candidates acting only as initialization. The core of our approach is in the use of ker-nel regression to generalize action value estimates over the entire parameter space, with the execution uncertainty model as its generalization kernel. KR-UCT distinguishes itself in a number of key ways. First, it allows information sharing be-tween all actions under consideration. Second, it can identify actions outside of the initial candidates for further exploration by combining kernel regression and kernel density estimation to optimize an exploration-exploitation balance akin to the popular UCB formula [Auer et al., 2002]. Third, it can ulti-mately select actions outside of the candidate set allowing it to improve on less-than-perfect domain knowledge. 
We evaluate KR-UCT in a high fidelity simulation of the Olympic sport of curling. Curling is an example of a chal-
Proceedings of the Twenty-Fifth International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI-16) 
690
lenging action selection problem with continuous actions, continuous stochastic outcomes, sequential decisions, execu-tion uncertainty, and the added challenge of an adversary. We show that the proposed algorithm significantly outperforms existing MCTS techniques. The improvement is apparent not only at short horizons, which allows exploring a large number of different shots, but also at long horizons when evaluating only tens of samples of execution outcomes. Furthermore, we show that existing MCTS improvements, such as RAVE and progressive widening do not improve standard UCT as significantly as KR-UCT in this domain. 
2 Background We begin by describing the core algorithms that KR-UCT will build upon, along with the main building blocks of the com-petitors used our evaluation. 
2.1 Monte Carlo Tree Search Monte Carlo Tree Search (MCTS) is a simulation-based search approach to planning in finite-horizon sequential decision-making settings. The core of the approach is to it-eratively simulate executions from the current state to a ter-minal state, incrementally growing a tree of simulated states (nodes) and actions (edges). Each simulation starts by visit-ing nodes in the tree, selecting which actions to take based on a selection function and information maintained in the node. Consequently, it transitions to a successor state. When a node is visited whose immediate children are not all in the tree, the node is expanded by adding a new leaf to the tree. Then, a rollout policy (e.g., random action selection) is applied from the new leaf to a terminal state. The value of the terminal state is then returned as the value for that new leaf and the information stored in the tree is updated. In the simplest case, a tree with height 1, MCTS starts with an empty tree and adds a single leaf each iteration. 
The most common selection function for MCTS is Up-per Confidence Bounds Applied to Trees (UCT) [Kocsis and Szepesvari, 2006]. Each node maintains the mean of the re-wards received for each action, v̄ 
a 
, and the number of times each action has been used, n 
a 
. It first uses each of the actions once and then decides what action to use based on the size of the one-sided confidence interval on the reward computed based on the Chernoff-Hoeffding bound as: 
argmax 
a 
v̄ a 
+ C 
s log 
P b 
n b 
n a 
(1) 
The constant C controls the exploration-exploitation tradeoff and is typically tuned for the specific domain. 
The success of MCTS across a wide range of domains has inspired many modifications and improvements. One of the most notable is Rapid Action Value Estimation (RAVE) [Gelly and Silver, 2011]. It allows learning about multiple actions from a single simulation, based on the intu-ition that in many domains, such as Go, an action that is good when taken later in the sequence is likely to be good right now as well. RAVE maintains additional statistics about the quality of actions regardless of where they have been used in a subtree. These statistics are then added to action values in 
the selection function (e.g., UCT) as an additional term with relative weight decreasing with more simulations. 
2.2 Progressive Widening Most selection functions in MCTS, including UCT, require trying every action once. So, obviously, they are not directly applicable in continuous action spaces. Even if the action space is finite, but very large, having too many options can result in a very shallow lookahead. The same solution to this problem was independently introduced in [Coulom, 2007] as progressive widening and [Chaslot et al., 2008] as progressive unpruning. It artificially limits the number of actions evalu-ated in a node by MCTS based on the number of visits to the node. Only after the quality of the best available action is estimated sufficiently well, additional actions are taken into consideration. The order of adding the actions could be done randomly or by exploiting domain knowledge. 
If a domain includes stochastic outcomes, such as being the result of execution uncertainty, the outcomes are com-monly represented by chance nodes in the search tree. If the set of outcomes is finite and small, then the next state can be sampled from the known probability distribution over the outcomes. If the possible outcomes are large or even con-tinuous then one can simply sample a small number of out-comes [Kearns et al., 2002] or slowly grow the number of sampled outcomes as the node is repeatedly visited, in the same way that progressive widening grows the number of ac-tions [Couëtoux et al., 2011]. 
UCT assures that the tree grows deeper more quickly in the promising parts of the search tree. The progressive widening strategies add that it also grows wider in the same parts of the search tree. 
2.3 Kernel Regression Kernel regression is a nonparametric method for estimating the conditional expectation of a real-valued random vari-able from data. In its simplest form [Nadaraya, 1964; Watson, 1964], it estimates the expected value of a point as an average of the values of all points in the data set, weighted based on a typically non-linear function of the distance from the point. The function defining the weight given a pair of points is called the kernel and further denoted K. For a data set (x 
i 
, y i 
) 
n 
i=0 
, the estimated expected values is: 
E(y|x) = P 
n 
i=0 
K(x, x i 
)y iP 
n 
i=0 
K(x, x i 
) 
. (2) 
The kernel is typically a smooth symmetric function, such as the Gaussian probability density function. However, asym-metric kernel functions can also be used in well-motivated cases (e.g., [Michels, 1992]). An important quantity related to kernel regression is kernel density, which quantifies the amount of relevant data available for a specific point in the domain. For any x, the kernel density is defined to be the denominator in Equation 2: 
W (x) = nX 
i=0 
K(x, x i 
). (3) 
691
Algorithm 1 Kernel Regression UCT 1: procedure KR-UCT(state) 2: if state is terminal then 3: return utility(state), false 4: expanded false 5: A actions considered in state 6: action argmax 
a2A 
E(v|a) + C q 
log 
P b2A W (b) 
W (a) 
7: if pP 
a2A 
n a 
< |A| then 8: newState child of state by taking action 9: rv, expanded KR-UCT(newState) 
10: if not expanded then 11: newAction ⇡ argmin 
K(action,a)>⌧ 
W (a) 12: add newAction to state 13: newState child of state by taking newAction 14: add initial actions to newState 15: rv  ROLLOUT(newState) 16: Update v̄ 
action 
, n action 
, and KR with rv 17: return rv, true 
3 Kernel Regression UCT The main idea behind KR-UCT is to increase the number of children (i.e., actions) of a node as it is repeatedly visited, while enabling information sharing between similar actions through kernel regression. All evaluated actions, both ini-tially provided candidates and progressively added actions, together with their estimated values, form a single dataset at each node for kernel regression. For the kernel function we use the probability density function of the known model of execution uncertainty, i.e., K(x, x0 
) is the model’s probability that action x0 is executed when x is the intended action. Equa-tion 2 then can be viewed as a simple Monte Carlo estimate of the integral corresponding to that evaluated action’s expected value. This particular kernel regressor is then used to esti-mate the two key quantities required by UCT. For the average of the action, v̄ 
a 
, we use the kernel regression estimate. For the number of visits, n 
a 
, we use the kernel density estimate of data coverage. Note that if we had a discrete action space and used a Dirac delta as the kernel (so K(x, x0 
) = 1 
x=x 
0 ), then this approach is identical to vanilla UCT. 
The pseudocode for KR-UCT is presented as Algorithm 1. The structure of the algorithm follows the standard four steps of MCTS (selection, expansion, simulation, and backpro-pogation). The main recursive procedure, KR-UCT, is called on the root of the search tree a fixed number of times deter-mined by a per-decision computation budget. It returns the value of the terminal node reached and a boolean flag indi-cating if the expansion step has already occurred. We explore some algorithmic details of each step below. 
Selection. At each decision node, our algorithm uses an adaptation of the UCB formula to select amongst already ex-plored outcomes to be further refined (line 6). Each node maintains the number of visits, n 
b 
, and the mean utility, v̄ b 
, for each outcome (child node) b. As outcomes are revisited throughout the iterations their mean and visit counts are up-dated. We incorporate such multiple samples of the same out-
come into our kernel regression and kernel density estimates by effectively counting each sample as its own data point. 
E(v|a) = 
P b2A K(a,b)v̄bnbP b2A K(a,b)nb 
(4) 
W (a) = 
P b2A 
K(a, b)n b 
. (5) 
These estimates are then plugged into their respective roles of the UCB formula, E(v|a) for v̄ 
a 
and W (a) for n a 
. The UCB formula is then used to select the action to refine further. As usual, the UCB exploration bias is considered infinite if the denominator in the term is 0 (i.e., W (a) = 0). The scaling constant C serves the same role as in vanilla UCT, control-ling the tradeoff between exploring less visited actions and refining the value of more promising actions. It should be experimentally tuned for each specific domain. 
Expansion. After selecting the action with the highest UCB value, the algorithm continues by either improving the esti-mated value of the action by recursing on its outcome (lines 8-9), or improving the estimated value of the action by adding a new outcome as a new child node (lines 11-15). This deci-sion is based on keeping the number of outcomes in a node bounded by some sublinear function of the number of visits to the node (line 7), just as in progressive widening. In the event of reaching a terminal node within the tree, a new outcome is always added at the leaf’s parent (line 10). When adding a new outcome, we want to choose an outcome b that will be heavily weighted by the kernel (i.e., K(a, b) is large), yet is not well represented by the current set of outcomes (i.e., W (b) is small). We achieve this balance by finding an out-come that minimizes the kernel density estimate within the set of all outcomes whose kernel weight is at least a threshold ⌧ (line 11). For computational efficiency, we approximate this optimization by choosing k outcome samples from the exe-cution uncertainty given the chosen action, and select from these outcomes the one with minimal kernel density. After identifying a new outcome, this state is added as a child of the current node with some generated set of initial actions, possibly determined using domain-specific knowledge (lines 12-14). 
Simulation and Backpropagation. When a new outcome is added to the tree, a complete simulation is executed to reach a terminal state using some rollout policy (line 15). As in vanilla MCTS, the rollout policy can involve random action selection, a fast decision policy learned from data [Silver et al., 2016] or based on hand-coded rules [Gelly et al., 2006], or even a static heuristic evaluation. The value of the result-ing terminal state is then used to update v̄ 
b 
and n b 
of the out-comes along the selected path through the tree. Finally, for the sake of efficiency, the kernel density and value estimates at actions can be updated incrementally during the backprop-agation step. 
Final Selection. After the computational budget is ex-hausted, we still need to use the results of the search to select an action to execute. It is common to use the most sampled action or the action with the highest sampled mean at the root. 
692
Instead, we select the action at the root with the greatest lower confidence bound (LCB) using our kernel regression and ker-nel density estimates: 
argmax 
a2A 
E(v|a)  C 
s log 
P b2A 
W b 
W a 
. (6) 
The constant C acts as a tradeoff between choosing actions that have been sampled the most (i.e., are the most certain) and actions that have high estimated value. This constant does not have to be the same as the constant used in the upper confidence bound calculation. 
Computational Complexity. Maintaining the value esti-mates E(v|a) and kernel densities W (a) for the set of actions A tracked by a node can be done incrementally in time linear in |A| in each iteration. If we store also the sum 
P b2A 
W b 
in the nodes, selection can be performed in a single pass over the set A. The most expensive operation is expansion, namely finding the minimal kernel density close to an action. With a naı̈ve implementation, evaluating each point in the parame-ter space takes O(|A|) operations; hence if the optimization evaluates k points, it takes O(k|A|) operations. This com-plexity can be in practice substantially reduced by storing the actions in a spatial index, such as R-trees [Guttman, 1984], but if all A actions are close to the selected shot, the worst case complexity stays the same. 
4 Experimental Evaluation We validate our algorithm using the Olympic sport of curling. 
4.1 Curling Curling is a two team game, where the goal is to slide (throw) stones, also known as rocks, down a sheet of ice towards the scoring area or house, a circular area centered on the button. Games are divided into rounds called ends, where teams alter-nate in throwing a total of eight stones each. When each end finishes, the team with the stone closest to the button scores points equal to the number of their stones in the house closer than any opponent stone. If the state in Figure 1 is the end of an end, yellow would score one point. If the yellow rock closest to the button were missing, then red would instead score two points. After an end, all stones are removed, and the next end begins. The winner is the team with the high-est score after all ends are played. A key aspect of curling, is that rocks do not follow a straight trajectory. Instead, due to the friction with the ice stones curl left or right, depending on the stone’s rotation as demonstrated by the dashed line in Figure 1. This fact allows teams to place stones behind other stones and make them harder to remove from the house. 
An important strategic consideration in the game is exe-cution uncertainty. A team may intend to deliver a stone at particular angle and velocity, but inevitably human precision has its limitations. In addition, the ice and stones create ad-ditional unpredictability as different parts of the ice or even different stones might see different amounts of friction and lateral forces. Debris on the ice can also cause drastic trajec-tory changes. When deciding what shot to attempt, the play-
Figure 1: Sample curling game state. The yellow player scores 1 point if this is the end of an end. The dashed line indicates a typical rock trajectory. 
ers have to carefully consider possible negative consequences of execution errors. 
4.2 Curling Simulator The physics of a curling stone is not fully understood and is a surprisingly active area of research [Denny, 2002; Jensen and Shegelski, 2004; Nyberg et al., 2012; 2013]; so, a simulation based on first principles is not possible. The curling simula-tor used in this paper is implemented using the Chipmunk 2D rigid body physics library with a heuristic lateral force that recreates empirically observed stone trajectories and modi-fied collision resolution to match empirically observed elas-ticity and energy conservation when rocks collide. A rock’s trajectory is simulated from its initial linear velocity and an-gular velocity (which due to the trajectory’s insensitivity to the speed of rotation is determined only by its sign). 
The curling simulation also needs a model of the execu-tion uncertainty. We model it based on Olympic-level play-ers. Their executed shot is usually quite close to the intended shot, with decreasing probability of being increasingly dif-ferent. However, the stone can move over debris drastically altering the shot’s trajectory from that which was intended. Therefore, we use the heavy-tailed Student-t distribution as the basis of our execution model. The amount of execution noise added to a shot depends on the weight (speed) of the shot. The faster shots tend to be more precise, since the ice conditions have smaller effect on their trajectory. The noise added to a specific shot is defined by three parameters: the variance of the Student-t distribution that is added to the in-tended weight, the variance of the Student-t distribution that is added to the aim, and the number of degrees of freedom of the distributions. We have fit these parameters to match the curling percentage statistics of men from the 2010 and 2014 Olympic games. The number of degrees of freedom for the Student-t distribution was fit to 5, the weight variance is ap-proximately 9.5 mm/s, and the aim variance varies with the weight and is between 1.16⇥ 10 
 3 and 3.65⇥ 10 
 3 radians. The simulator does not explicitly model sweeping, where 
the non-throwing members of a team can vigorously brush the ice in front of a travelling rock to reduce friction and keep a rock’s trajectory straighter. While sweeping is critical to the game of curling, we model its effect as a reduction in the execution uncertainty, i.e., an increase in the likelihood the actual rock’s trajectory is close to the planned trajectory.1 
1Sweeping does have other effects beyond reducing execution 
693
Figure 2: The game state of the final shot of the fifth end in the 2014 Olympics men’s gold medal match. The scores of different shot parameters with an out-turn (counter-clockwise spin), the shots generated by the domain knowledge and the shots evaluated by the analyzed algorithms after 300 samples. 
4.3 Domain Knowledge All evaluated algorithms use the same domain knowledge: a curling-specific shot generator that creates a list of potential shots to take from a particular state. The generator works using a list of hand-defined types of shots, such as drawing to the button, removing an opponent’s rock, or guarding its own rock, and generates the needed weight, aim, and rotation to make the shot, if it is possible. It also stores the purpose of this shot such as (“takeout yellow 3”), which can be used with RAVE to learn quickly about shots in a particular state. The generator typically generates between 7 and 30 different candidate shots. Figure 2 shows a game state in which red throws the last shot of the end. The grayscale heatmap shows the resulting score of executing a shot as the aim (x-axis) and weight vary (y-axis) when using a counter-clockwise rota-tion. Note that execution uncertainty makes achieving the exact values shown in the heatmap impossible in expectation. Overlaid on this heatmap are blue points showing the candi-dates shots from the generator. The shot generator does not always produce the best shot in expectation, as seen by the fact that there is no generated shot in the center of large light area with weight 2000 mm/sec and aim -0.035 radians. 
The other domain knowledge in use is a hand-coded roll-out policy. The policy involves a hand-coded set of rules to select an action from any state. Even though the rules are de-terministic, the shots are executed with execution uncertainty and therefore the rollout policy outcomes vary. Because the physical simulator is computationally expensive, we did not 
error. Sweeping focused on the end of a rock’s trajectory can allow it to reach a location on the ice not possible without sweeping. Fur-thermore, a shot far from an intended shot can be swept to achieve an entirely different purpose, such as rolling under a different guard if the executed angle is off. The primary effect of sweeping, though, is to compensate for execution error. 
KR-UCT PW RAVE+PW RAVE UCT KR-UCT 0.086 0.084 0.105 0.110 PW -0.086 0.010 0.014 0.037 RAVE + PW -0.084 -0.010 0.015 0.033 RAVE -0.105 -0.014 -0.015 0.006 UCT -0.110 -0.037 -0.033 -0.006 
Table 1: The average point differences by the algorithms in the rows against the one in the column over one-end games. Bold values denote statistical significance (p=0.95; upper-tailed t-test). 
rollout full ends. Instead, rollouts would be restricted to at most five simulated shots, after which the end was scored as if it were complete. Many shots in the middle of an end can result in a back-and-forth of placing and removing one’s own/opponent stones, which this approach dispenses with. 
4.4 Algorithms We compare our proposed KR-UCT algorithm with four other variants of MCTS. (1) UCT: available actions are limited to generated shots, but the number of random outcomes sampled for each action is kept below the square root of the number of its visits. (2) RAVE: like UCT but with RAVE using the gen-erator’s action descriptions to identify actions. (3) PW: like UCT but with progressive widening on the generated actions; adding random actions when the number of actions is below the square root of the number of visits. (4) RAVE+PW: com-bination of RAVE and PW; added action has the highest value (UCT + RAVE). 
All algorithms used 1600 samples and evaluated the fi-nal shot selection with a lower confidence bound estimate (C 
LCB 
= 0.001). For each algorithm, we ran a round robin tournament to identify a good UCB constant from the set {0.01, 0.1, 1.0, 10, 100}. For all algorithms, C 
UCB 
= 1.0 was the best constant. For the weighting in RAVE, we did a similar round robin tournament to select the   parameter from the set {0.01, 0.1, 1.0, 10.0, 100.0}, and found   = 1.0 to be the best for RAVE and RAVE+PW. For KR-UCT, we defined ⌧ = 0.02 and k = 10. We found that these values were a good trade off of runtime and exploration. 
4.5 One-End Games We first present results of head-to-head performance in a sin-gle end of curling. Each algorithm played against each other in 16000 one-end games. Because having the last shot (the hammer) is advantageous, algorithms played an equal num-ber of games with and without the hammer against each oppo-nent. The algorithms aimed to optimize the score differential in the game (as opposed to the probability of being ahead) and so our results are presented as average (differences in) points. 
Table 1 shows the results of every pair of algorithms. KR-UCT had a positive expected point differential against every other algorithm by statisticially significant margins. Not sur-prisingly, UCT appears to be its weakest opponent. Addition-ally, we can see that while RAVE does not significantly out-perform UCT, which can be attributed to the limited number of samples. With 1600 samples, the algorithm rarely searches past a depth of 3, so the RAVE statistics are underutilized. 
694
KR-UCT PW RAVE+PW RAVE UCT KR-UCT 1.424 1.302 1.301 1.303 1.302 PW 1.452 1.297 1.297 1.297 1.297 RAVE+PW 1.443 1.284 1.284 1.284 1.284 RAVE 1.446 1.274 1.274 1.274 1.274 UCT 1.431 1.264 1.264 1.265 1.265 
Table 2: Average number of points gained by algorithms in the columns in all hammer shot states reached by algorithms in the rows. The standard error on these values is 0.007. Bold values denote a statistically significant maximum within the row (p = 0.99; paired t-test). 
KR-UCT RAVE+PW KR-UCT 1.392 1.272 RAVE+PW 1.405 1.248 
KR-UCT PW KR-UCT 1.414 1.281 PW 1.416 1.265 
KR-UCT RAVE KR-UCT 1.428 1.311 RAVE 1.400 1.242 
KR-UCT UCT KR-UCT 1.461 1.344 UCT 1.423 1.255 
Table 3: Average number of points gained by algorithms in the columns in the hammer shot states reached by algorithms in the rows in mutual matches of the algorithms mentioned in each table. Standard error  0.011 for each entry. 
However, the algorithms with Progressive Widening result in an improvement, although the gain achieved by KR-UCT is much higher with a higher statistical confidence. KR-UCT’s gain of 0.110 points per end, in expectation, against UCT, is a considerable result. If we extended the result to a standard 10-end game, KR-UCT might expect to see a full point im-provement per game. In the 2014 Olympics, 29% of curling games were decided by a single point. 
4.6 Hammer Shot Analysis The hammer shot is an interesting case to analyze [Ahmad et al., 2016]. Being the last shot of the end, it is by far the most important. Furthermore, the search does not have to re-cursively evaluate long term consequences of actions, so al-gorithms can evaluate substantially more actions in the same computational budget. 
For each game in the round robin tournament, we took the state right before the hammer shot and let other algorithms choose a shot from that state. We then found the expected value of that shot by simulating it under our execution model 100,000 times. Table 2 shows the expected points earned by averaging over the reached hammer states. Each row rep-resents the set of hammer states reached by a particular al-gorithm, and the columns represent the algorithms evaluated from these states. The subtables in Table 3 show the same analysis, except the set of states considered is limited to states from the matches between the two algorithms in the subtable. These tables allow us to analyze two effects: an algorithm’s ability to choose a good hammer shot and an algorithm’s abil-ity to reach a good state for the hammer shot. 
A clear picture emerges when comparing the columns of Table 2. KR-UCT outperforms all other algorithms by over 0.12 points in its shot selection, regardless of the set of ham-
mer states under consideration. Also, notice that preexisting variants of UCT have nearly identical performance. RAVE learns from actions in a subtree, which are not present in this case; PW will always explore all options removing the need to consider a smaller subset. 
This performance difference highlights the main disadvan-tage of other algorithms: they can choose only from the gen-erated shots, which is a severe limitation in the hammer shot, when available samples are sufficient to explore far more op-tions. It can be seen quite dramatically in the bottom part of Figure 2. The two heatmaps are overlaid with the shots eval-uated by vanilla UCT and KR-UCT in the first 300 samples from this hammer state. Notice the generated candidate shot at weight 2000 mm/s and aim -0.03 radians, which is on the edge of a high-value region. In UCT, approximately half of the noisy samples of this shot receive 1 point, but the other half receives -1 point and the shot is not selected. The algo-rithm uses more samples in the smaller region left of this shot. However, KR-UCT is not restricted to choose only from the generated shots. As soon as it generates a noisy shot in the good region, the next sample will be near this shot and the sampling will gradually move all over the high-value region. The final shot is selected close to the center of this region. 
Additionally, we can compare a table’s rows to evaluate an algorithm’s ability to reach a good state through lookahead and planning, even when a different algorithm is choosing the final hammer shot. Looking at the rows in the subtables of Ta-ble 3, we see a general trend that KR-UCT generally reaches states that result in equal or greater value regardless of which algorithm is selecting the final shot. On the whole this sug-gests KR-UCT is an improvement over UCT when the search space is shallow as well as when it is deep. This story is only contradicted in the case where KR-UCT is the algorithm se-lecting the hammer shot. This discrepancy is most clear in the full results of Table 2 where the preexisting enhancements to UCT seem to result in more valuable states for KR-UCT than KR-UCT does for itself (viz., compare the different rows in the KR-UCT column). We would like to explore this curious effect further in future work. 
5 Conclusion While a number of planning approaches have been proposed for sequential decision-making in continuous action spaces, none fully exploit the situation which arises from execution uncertainty. We present a new approach, KR-UCT, based on the insight that samples of execution uncertainty from a par-ticular action provide information about any other action that could have generated that execution outcome. KR-UCT uses kernel regression to both share information between actions with similar distributions of outcomes and, more importantly, guide the exploration of actions outside of the initially pro-vided candidate set. We show that the algorithm makes a sig-nificant improvement over both vanilla UCT and some of its standard enhancements. 
Acknowledgements This research was funded by NSERC and Alberta Innovates Technology Futures (AITF) through Amii, the Alberta Ma-
695
chine Intelligence Institute. The computational resources were made possible by Compute Canada and Calcul Québec. Additionally, we thank all others who have contributed in the development of the Computer Curling Research Group. 
References [Ahmad et al., 2016] Zaheen Farraz Ahmad, Robert C. 
Holte, and Michael Bowling. Action selection for hammer shots in curling. In Proceedings of the Twenty-Fifth In-ternational Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence (IJ-CAI), 2016. 
[Archibald et al., 2009] Christopher Archibald, Alon Alt-man, and Yoav Shoham. Analysis of a winning compu-tational billiards player. In Proceedings of the 21st in-ternational jont conference on Artifical intelligence, pages 1377–1382. Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc., 2009. 
[Auer et al., 2002] Peter Auer, Nicolo Cesa-Bianchi, and Paul Fischer. Finite-time analysis of the multiarmed bandit problem. Machine learning, 47(2-3):235–256, 2002. 
[Bubeck et al., 2011] Sébastien Bubeck, Rémi Munos, Gilles Stoltz, and Csaba Szepesvári. q-armed bandits. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 12:1655–1695, 2011. 
[Chaslot et al., 2008] G.M.J.B. Chaslot, M.H.M. Winands, J.W.H.M. Uiterwijk, H.J. van den Herik, and B. Bouzy. Progressive strategies for Monte-Carlo tree search. New Mathematics and Natural Computation, 4(3):343, 2008. 
[Couëtoux et al., 2011] Adrien Couëtoux, Jean-Baptiste Hoock, Nataliya Sokolovska, Olivier Teytaud, and Nico-las Bonnard. Continuous upper confidence trees. In Learning and Intelligent Optimization, pages 433–445. Springer, 2011. 
[Coulom, 2007] Rémi Coulom. Computing “ELO ratings” of move patterns in the game of go. ICGA Journal, 30(4):198–208, 2007. 
[Denny, 2002] Mark Denny. Curling rock dynamics: To-wards a realistic model. Canadian journal of physics, 80(9):1005–1014, 2002. 
[Gelly and Silver, 2011] Sylvain Gelly and David Silver. Monte-Carlo tree search and rapid action value estima-tion in computer go. Artificial Intelligence, 175(11):1856– 1875, 2011. 
[Gelly et al., 2006] Sylvain Gelly, Yizao Wang, Rémi Munos, and Olivier Teytaud. Modification of UCT with patterns in Monte-Carlo go. Research Report RR-6062, INRIA, 2006. 
[Guttman, 1984] Antonin Guttman. R-trees: A dynamic in-dex structure for spatial searching, volume 14. ACM, 1984. 
[Jensen and Shegelski, 2004] E.T. Jensen and Mark R.A. Shegelski. The motion of curling rocks: Experimen-tal investigation and semi-phenomenological description. Canadian journal of physics, 82(10):791–809, 2004. 
[Kearns et al., 2002] Michael Kearns, Yishay Mansour, and Andrew Y. Ng. A sparse sampling algorithm for near-optimal planning in large Markov decision processes. Ma-chine Learning, 49(2-3):193–208, 2002. 
[Kocsis and Szepesvari, 2006] Levente Kocsis and Csaba Szepesvari. Bandit based Monte-Carlo planning. In Ma-chine Learning: ECML 2006, pages 282–293. Springer Berlin / Heidelberg, 2006. 
[Mansley et al., 2011] Christopher R. Mansley, Ari Wein-stein, and Michael L. Littman. Sample-based planning for continuous action Markov decision processes. In Pro-ceedings of the 21st International Conference on Auto-mated Planning and Scheduling, ICAPS 2011, Freiburg, Germany June 11-16, 2011, 2011. 
[Michels, 1992] Paul Michels. Asymmetric kernel functions in non-parametric regression analysis and prediction. The Statistician, pages 439–454, 1992. 
[Nadaraya, 1964] Elizbar A Nadaraya. On estimating regres-sion. Theory of Probability & Its Applications, 9(1):141– 142, 1964. 
[Nyberg et al., 2012] Harald Nyberg, Sture Hogmark, and Staffan Jacobson. Calculated trajectories of curling stones sliding under asymmetrical friction. In Nordtrib 2012, 15th Nordic Symposium on Tribology, 12-15 June 2012, Trondheim, Norway, 2012. 
[Nyberg et al., 2013] Harald Nyberg, Sara Alfredson, Sture Hogmark, and Staffan Jacobson. The asymmetrical fric-tion mechanism that puts the curl in the curling stone. Wear, 301(1):583–589, 2013. 
[Silver et al., 2016] David Silver, Aja Huang, Chris J. Mad-dison, Arthur Guez, Laurent Sifre, George van den Driess-che, Julian Schrittwieser, Ioannis Antonoglou, Veda Pan-neershelvam, Marc Lanctot, Sander Dieleman, Dominik Grewe, John Nham, Nal Kalchbrenner, Ilya Sutskever, Timothy Lillicrap, Madeleine Leach, Koray Kavukcuoglu, Thore Graepel, and Demis Hassabis. Mastering the game of go with deep neural networks and tree search. Nature, 529(7587):484–489, 01 2016. 
[Smith, 2007] Michael Smith. Pickpocket: A computer bil-liards shark. Artificial Intelligence, 171(1617):1069 – 1091, 2007. 
[Watson, 1964] Geoffrey S. Watson. Smooth regression analysis. Sankhya: The Indian Journal of Statistics, Se-ries A, pages 359–372, 1964. 
[Yamamoto et al., 2015] Masahito Yamamoto, Shu Kato, and Hiroyuki Iizuka. Digital curling strategy based on game tree search. In Computational Intelligence and Games (CIG), 2015 IEEE Conference on, pages 474–480. IEEE, 2015. 
696