> Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2105.06136

Adaptive Warm-Start MCTS in AlphaZero-like Deep Reinforcement Learning 
Hui Wang , Mike Preuss , Aske Plaat Leiden Institute of Advanced Computer Science, Leiden University, 
Leiden, the Netherlands h.wang.13@liacs.leidenuniv.nl 
Abstract 
AlphaZero has achieved impressive performance in deep reinforcement learning by utilizing an archi-tecture that combines search and training of a neu-ral network in self-play. Many researchers are look-ing for ways to reproduce and improve results for other games/tasks. However, the architecture is de-signed to learn from scratch, tabula rasa, accepting a cold-start problem in self-play. Recently, a warm-start enhancement method for Monte Carlo Tree Search was proposed to improve the self-play start-ing phase. It employs a fixed parameter I ′ to con-trol the warm-start length. Improved performance was reported in small board games. In this paper we present results with an adaptive switch method. Ex-periments show that our approach works better than the fixed I ′, especially for ”deep,” tactical, games (Othello and Connect Four). We conjecture that the adaptive value for I ′ is also influenced by the size of the game, and that on average I ′ will increase with game size. We conclude that AlphaZero-like deep reinforcement learning benefits from adaptive rollout based warm-start, as Rapid Action Value Estimate did for rollout-based reinforcement learn-ing 15 years ago. 
1 Introduction The combination of online Monte Carlo Tree Search (MCTS) [Browne et al., 2012] in self-play and offline neural network training has been widely applied as a deep reinforcement learning technique, in particular for solving game-related problems by means of the AlphaGo series programs [Silver et al., 2016; Silver et al., 2017; Silver et al., 2018]. The ap-proach of this paradigm is to use game playing records from self-play by MCTS as training examples to train the neural network, whereas this trained neural network is used to in-form the MCTS value and policy. Note that in contrast to Al-phaGo Zero or AlphaZero,1 the original AlphaGo also uses large amounts of expert data to train the neural network and a 
1AlphaZero is a general framework based on AlphaGo Zero for different games 
fast rollout policy together with the policy provided by neural network to guide the MCTS search. 
However, although the transition from a combination of us-ing expert data and self-play (AlphaGo) to only using self-play (AlphaGo Zero and AlphaZero) appears to have only positive results, it does raise some questions. 
The first question is: ‘should all human expert data be abandoned?’ In other games we have seen that human knowl-edge is essential for mastering complex games, such as Star-Craft [Vinyals et al., 2019]. Then when should expert data be taken into consideration while training neural networks? 
The second question is: ‘should the fast rollout policy be abandoned?’ Recently, [Wang et al., 2020c] have proposed to use warm-start search enhancements at the start phase in AlphaZero-like self-play, which improves performance in 3 small board games. Instead of only using the neural network for value and policy, in the first few iterations, classic rollout can be used (or RAVE, or a combination, or a combination with the neural network). This can improve training espe-cially at the start phase of self-play training. 
In fact, the essence of the warm-start search enhancement is to re-generate expert knowledge in the start phase of self-play training, to reduce the cold-start problem of playing against untrained agents. The method uses rollout (which can be seen as experts) instead of a randomly initialized neural network, up until a number of I ′ iterations, when it switches to the regular value network. In their experiments, the I ′ was fixed at 5. Obviously, a fixed I ′ may not be optimal. There-fore, in this work, we propose an adaptive switch method. The method uses an arena in the self-play stage (see Al-gorithm 2), where the search enhancement and the default MCTS are matched, to judge whether to switch or not. With this mechanism, we can dynamically switch off the enhance-ment if it is no longer better than the default MCTS player, as the neural network is being trained. 
Our main contributions can be summarized as follows: 
1. Warm-start method improves the Elo of AlphaZero-like self-play in small games, but it introduces a new hyper-parameter. Adaptive warm-start further improves perfor-mance and removes the hyper-parameter. 
2. For deep games (with a small branching factor) warm-start works better than for shallow games. This indicates that the effectiveness of warm-start method may increase 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
for larger games. 
The rest of paper is designed as follows. An overview of the most relevant literature is given in Sect. 2. Before proposing our adaptive switch method in Sect. 4, we describe the warm-start AlphaZero-like self-play algorithm in Sect. 3. Thereafter, we set up the experiments in Sect. 5 and present their results in Sect. 6. Finally, we conclude our paper and discuss future work. 
2 Related Work There are a lot of early successful works in reinforcement learning [Sutton and Barto, 2018], e.g. using temporal dif-ference learning with a neural network to play backgammon [Tesauro, 1995]. MCTS has also been well studied, and many variants/enhancements were designed to solve prob-lems in the domain of sequential decisions, especially on games. For example, enhancements such as Rapid Action Value Estimate (RAVE) and All Moves as First (AMAF) have been conceived to improve MCTS [Gelly and Silver, 2007; Gelly and Silver, 2011]. The AlphaGo series algorithms re-place the table based model with a deep neural network based model, where the neural network has a policy head (for eval-uating of a state) and a value head (for learning a best ac-tion) [Wang et al., 2019], enabled by the GPU hardware de-velopment. Thereafter, the structure that combines MCTS with neural network training has become a typical approach for reinforcement learning tasks and many successful ap-plications [Segler et al., 2018; Wang et al., 2020b] of this kind model-based deep reinforcement learning [Schmidhu-ber, 2015]. Comparing AlphaGo with AlphaGo Zero and Al-phaZero, the latter did not use any expert data to train the neural network, and abandoned the fast rollout policy for im-proving the MCTS on the trained neural network. Therefore, all training data is generated purely by self-play, which is also a very important feature of reinforcement learning. We base our work on an open reimplementation of AlphaZero, Alp-haZero General [Nair, 2018]. 
There are many interesting works on self-play in reinforce-ment learning [Tesauro, 1995; Runarsson and Lucas, 2005; Plaat, 2020]. Temporal difference learning for acquiring posi-tion evaluation in small board Go with co-evolution has been compared to self-play [Runarsson and Lucas, 2005]. These works demonstrated the impressive results for self-play and emphasized its importance. 
Within a general game playing framework, in order to im-prove training examples efficiency, [Wang et al., 2018] as-sessed the potential of classical Q-learning by introducing Monte Carlo Search enhancements. In an AlphaZero-like self-play framework, [Wu, 2019] used domain-specific fea-tures and optimizations, starting from random initialization and no preexisting data, to accelerate the training. 
However, AlphaStar, the acclaimed algorithm for beating human professionals at StarCraft [Vinyals et al., 2019], went back to utilizing human expert data, thereby suggesting that this is still an option at the start phase of training. Apart from this, there are few studies on applying MCTS enhance-ments in AlphaZero-like self-play. Only [Wang et al., 2020c], which proposed a warm-start search enhancement method, 
pointed out the promising potential of utilizing MCTS en-hancements (like a rollout policy) to re-generate expert data at the start phase of training. Our approach differs from AlphaS-tar, as we generate expert data using MCTS enhancements other than collecting it from humans; further, compared to the static warm-start of [Wang et al., 2020c], we propose an adaptive method to control the iteration length of using such enhancements instead of a fixed I ′. 
3 Warm-Start AlphaZero Self-play We will now introduce the warm-start enhancement method. 
3.1 The Algorithm Framework Based on [Silver et al., 2018; Wang et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2020c], the core of AlphaZero-like self-play (see Algo-rithm 1) is an iterative loop which consists of three different stages within the single iteration as follows: 
1. self-play: The first stage is playing several games against with itself to generate training examples. 
2. neural network training: The second stage is feeding the neural network with training examples (generated in the first stage) to train a new model. 
3. arena comparison: The last stage is employing a tour-nament to compare the newly trained model and the old model to decide whether to update or not. 
The detail description of these 3 stages can be found in [Wang et al., 2020c]. Note that in the Algorithm 1, line 5, a fixed I ′ is employed to control whether to use neural net-work MCTS or MCTS enhancements, the I ′ should be set as relatively smaller than I , which is known as warm-start search. The MCTS algorithm and MCTS enhancements will be introduced in next subsections. 
Algorithm 1 Warm-start AlphaZero-like Self-play Algorithm 1: Randomly initialize fθ , assign retrain buffer D 2: for iteration=1, . . . ,I ′, . . . , I do 3: for episode=1,. . . , E do . self-play 4: for t=1, . . . , T ′, . . . , T do 5: if I ≤ I ′ then πt ←MCTS Enhancement 6: else πt ← default MCTS 7: if t ≤ T ′ then at = randomly select on πt 8: else at = argmaxa(πt) 
9: executeAction(st, at) 10: D ← (st, πt, zt) with outcome zt∈[1,T ] 
11: Sample minibatch (sj , πj , zj) from D . training 12: Train fθ′ ← fθ 13: fθ = fθ′ if fθ′ is better, using default MCTS . arena 14: return fθ; 
3.2 MCTS Classical MCTS has shown successful performance to solve complex games, by taking random samples in the search space to evaluate the state value. Basically, the classi-cal MCTS algorithm can be divided into 4 stages, which are known as selection, expansion, rollout and backpropa-gate [Browne et al., 2012]. However, for the default MCTS
in AlphaZero-like self-play (eg. our Baseline), the neural net-work directly informs the MCTS state policy and value to guide the search instead of running a rollout. 
3.3 MCTS enhancements In this paper, we adopt the same two individual enhancements and three combinations to improve neural network training as were used by [Wang et al., 2020c]. Rollout is running a classic MCTS random rollout to get a value that provides more meaningful information than a value from random initialized neural network. RAVE is a well-studied enhancement to cope with the cold-start of MCTS in games like Go [Gelly and Silver, 2007], where the playout-sequence can be transposed. The core idea of RAVE is using AMAF to update the state visit count Nrave and Q-value Qrave, which are written as: Nrave(st1 , at2) ← Nrave(st1 , at2) + 1, Qrave(st1 , at2) ← Nrave(st1 ,at2 
)∗Qrave(st1 ,at2 )+v 
Nrave(st1 ,at2 )+1 , where st1 ∈ V isitedPath, 
and at2 ∈ A(st1), and for ∀t < t2, at 6= at2 . The P-UCT of RAVE is calculated as follows: 
UCTrave(s, a) = (1− β) ∗ U(s, a) + β ∗ Urave(s, a) (1) 
where 
Urave(s, a) = Qrave(s, a)+c∗P (s, a) √ Nrave(s, ·) 
Nrave(s, a) + 1 (2) 
and 
β = 
√ equivalence 
3 ∗N(s, ·) + equivalence (3) 
The value of equivalence is usually set to the number of MCTS simulations (i.e m=100 in our experiments). RoRa is the combination which simply adds the random roll-out to enhance RAVE. WRo introduces a weighted sum of rollout value and the neu-ral network value as the return value to guide MCTS. In our experiments, v(s) is computed as follows: 
v(s) = (1− weight) ∗ vnetwork + weight ∗ vrollout (4) 
WRoRa also employs a weighted sum to combine the value from the neural network and the value of RoRa. The v(s) for MCTS search in WRoRa is computed as follows: 
v(s) = (1− weight) ∗ vnetwork + weight ∗ vrora (5) 
Different from [Wang et al., 2020c], since there is no pre-determined I ′, in our work, weight is simply calculated as 1/i, i ∈ [1, I], where i is the current iteration number. 
4 Adaptive Warm-Start Switch Method The fixed I ′ to control the length of using warm-start search enhancements as suggested by [Wang et al., 2020c] works, but seems to require different parameter values for different games. In consequence, a costly tuning process would be necessary for each game. Thus, an adaptive method would have multiple advantages. 
We notice that the core of the warm-start method is re-generating expert data to train the neural network at the start phase of self-training to avoid learning from weak (random or near random) self-play. We suggest to stop the warm-start when the neural network is on average playing stronger than the enhancements. Therefore, in the self-play, we employ a tournament to compare the standard AlphaZero-like self-play model (Baseline) and the enhancements (see Algorithm 2). The switch occurs once the Baseline MCTS wins more than 50%. In order to avoid spending too much time on this, these arena game records will directly be used as training examples, indicating that the training data is played by the enhance-ments and the Baseline. This scheme enables to switch at individual points in time for different games and even differ-ent training runs. 
Algorithm 2 Adaptive Warm-Start Switch Algorithm 1: Initialize fθ with random weights; Initialize retrain buffer D, 
Switch←False, rmcts ← 0 2: for iteration=1, . . . , I do . no I ′ 
3: if not Switch then . not switch 4: for episode=1,. . . , E do . arena with enhancements 5: for t=1, . . . , T ′, . . . , T do 6: if episode ≤ E/2 then 7: if t is odd then πt ←MCTS Enhancement 8: else πt ← default MCTS 9: else 
10: if t is odd then πt ← default MCTS 11: else πt ←MCTS Enhancement 12: if t ≤ T ′ then at = randomly select on πt 13: else at = argmaxa(πt) 
14: executeAction(st, at) 15: D ← (st, πt, zt) with outcome zt∈[1,T ] 
16: rmcts+= reward of default MCTS in this episode 17: else . switch 18: for episode=1,. . . , E do . purely self-play 19: for t=1, . . . , T ′, . . . , T do 20: πt ← default MCTS 21: if t ≤ T ′ then at = randomly select on πt 22: else at = argmaxa(πt) 
23: executeAction(st, at) 24: D ← (st, πt, zt) with outcome zt∈[1,T ] 
25: Set Switch←True if rmcts >0, and set rmcts ← 0 26: Sample minibatch (sj , πj , zj) from D . training 27: Train fθ′ ← fθ 28: fθ = fθ′ if fθ′ is better, using default MCTS . arena 29: return fθ; 
5 Experimental Setup Since [Wang et al., 2020c] only studied the winrate of single rollout and RAVE against a random player, this can be used as a test to check whether rollout and RAVE work. How-ever, it does not reveal any information about relative play-ing strength, which is necessary to explain how good train-ing examples provided by MCTS enhancements actually are. Therefore, at first we let all 5 enhancements and the base-line MCTS play 100 repetitions with each other on the same
3 games (6×6 Connect Four, Othello and Gobang, game de-scription can be found in [Wang et al., 2020c]) in order to investigate the relative playing strength of each pair. 
In the second experiment, we tune the fixed I ′, where I ′ ∈ {1, 3, 5, 7, 9}, for different search enhancements, based on Algorithm 1 to play 6×6 Connect Four. 
In our last experiment, we use new adaptive switch method Algorithm 2 to play 6×6 Othello, Connect Four and Gobang. We set parameters values according to Table 1. The parameter choices are based on [Wang et al., 2020a]. 
Our experiments are run on a high-performance computing (HPC) server, which is a cluster consisting of 20 CPU nodes (40 TFlops) and 10 GPU nodes (40 GPU, 20 TFlops CPU + 536 TFlops GPU). We use small versions of games (6×6) in order to perform a medium number of repetitions. In the following, our figures show error bars of 8 runs, of 100 iter-ations of self-play. Each single run is deployed in a single GPU which takes several days for different games. 
Parameter Description Value I number of iteration 100 rs number of retrain iteration 20 ep number of epoch 10 E number of episode 50 bs batch size 64 T’ step threshold 15 lr learning rate 0.005 m MCTS simulation times 100 d dropout probability 0.3 c weight in UCT 1.0 n number of comparison games 40 u update threshold 0.6 
Table 1: Default Parameter Setting 
6 Results We list results for a tournament of Baseline and enhance-ments (Table 2). Digging deeper, we also report the effect of the hyper-parameter I ′ (Fig 1). And results for the adaptive warm-start switch are shown in Table 3, Fig 2 and Fig 3. 
6.1 MCTS vs MCTS Enhancements Here, we compare the Baseline player (the neural network is initialized randomly which can be regarded as an arena in the first iteration self-play) to the other 5 MCTS enhancements players on 3 different games. Each pair performs 100 rep-etitions. In Table 2, we can see that for Connect Four, the highest winrate is achieved by WRoRa, the lowest by Rave. Except Rave, others are all higher than 50%, showing that the enhancements (except Rave) are better than the untrained Baseline. In Gobang, it is similar, Rave is the lowest, RoRa is the highest. But the winrates are relatively lower than that in other 2 games. It is interesting that in Othello, all winrates are relatively the highest compared to the 2 other games (nearly 100%), although Rave still achieves the lowest winrate which is higher than 50%. 
One reason that enhancements work best in Othello is that the Othello game tree is the longest and narrowest (low 
branching factor). Enhancements like Rollout can provide relatively accurate estimations for these trees. In contrast, Gobang has the shortest game length and the most legal ac-tion options. Enhancements like Rollout do not contribute much to the search in short but wide search tree with limited MCTS simulation. As in shorter games it is more likely to reach a terminal state, both Baseline and enhancements get the true result. Therefore, in comparison to MCTS, enhance-ments like Rollout work better while it does not terminate too fast. Rave is filling more state action pairs based on informa-tion from the neural network, its weaknesses at the beginning are more emphasized. After some iterations of training, the neural network becomes smarter, and Rave can therefore en-hance the performance as shown in [Wang et al., 2020c]. 
Table 2: Results of comparing default MCTS with Rollout, Rave, RoRa, WRo and WRoRa, respectively on the three games with ran-dom neural network, weight as 1/2, T ′=0, win rates in percent (row vs column), 100 repetitions each. 
Default MCTS ConnectFour Othello Gobang 
Rollout 64 93 65 Rave 27.5 53 43 RoRa 76 98 70 WRo 82 96 57 WRoRa 82.5 99 62 
6.2 Fixed I ′ Tuning Taking Connect Four as an example, in this experiment we search for an optimal fixed I ′ value, utilizing the warm-start search method proposed in [Wang et al., 2020c]. We set I ′ as 1, 3, 5, 7, 9 respectively (the value should be relatively small since the enhancement is only expected to be used at the start phase of training). The Elo ratings of each enhancements using different I ′ are presented in Fig 1. The Elo ratings are calculated based on the tournament results using a Bayesian Elo computation system [Coulom, 2008], same for Fig 3. We can see that for Rave and WRoRa, it turns out that I ′ = 7 is the optimal value for fixed I ′ warm-start framework, for others, it is still unclear which value is the best, indicating that the tuning is inefficient and costly. 
6.3 Adaptive Warm-Start Switch In this final experiment, we apply the newly suggested adap-tive switch warm-start search enhancement method and com-pare it to the fixed I ′. We are especially interested in the av-erages and variances of the switching times that result from adaptive switching. 
We train models with the parameters in Table 1 and then let them compete against each other in different games. In addi-tion, we record the specific iteration number where the switch occurs for every training run and the corresponding self-play arena rewards of MCTS before this iteration. A statistic of the iteration number for 3 games is shown in Table 3. 
The table shows that, generally, the iteration number is relatively small compared to the total length of the training (100 iterations), and in these small games the neural network
Baseline I’=1 I’=3 I’=5 I’=7 I’=9 −100 
−80 
−60 
−40 
−20 
0 
20 
40 
60 
80 
 
 
 
(a) Rollout 
Baseline I’=1 I’=3 I’=5 I’=7 I’=9 −100 
−80 
−60 
−40 
−20 
0 
20 
40 
60 
80 
E lo 
ra tin 
g 
(b) Rave 
Baseline I’=1 I’=3 I’=5 I’=7 I’=9 −100 
−80 
−60 
−40 
−20 
0 
20 
40 
60 
80 
 
 
 
(c) RoRa 
Baseline I’=1 I’=3 I’=5 I’=7 I’=9 −100 
−80 
−60 
−40 
−20 
0 
20 
40 
60 
80 
E lo 
ra tin 
g 
(d) WRo 
Baseline I’=1 I’=3 I’=5 I’=7 I’=9 −100 
−80 
−60 
−40 
−20 
0 
20 
40 
60 
80 
E lo 
ra tin 
g 
(e) WRoRa 
Figure 1: Elo ratings for different warm-start phase iterations with different search enhancement on 6×6 Connect Four 
Table 3: Switching iterations for training on different games with different enhancements over 8 repetitions (average iteration number ± standard deviation) 
Connect Four Othello Gobang Rollout 6.625± 3.039 5.5± 1.732 1.375±0.484 Rave 2.375±1.218 3.125 ±2.667 1.125±0.331 RoRa 7.75 ±4.74 5.125 ±1.364 1.125±0.331 WRo 4.25±1.561 4.375±1.654 1.125±0.331 WRoRa 4.375±1.576 4.0±1.0 1.25±0.433 
is quickly getting stronger. Besides, not only for different games, the switch iteration is different, but also for differ-ent training runs on the same game, the switch iteration also varies. This is because for different training runs, the neu-ral network training progresses differently (we already start from different random initializations). Therefore, a fixed I ′ can not be used for each specific training. Note that for Gob-ang, a game with a large branching factor, with the default setting, it always switches at the first iteration. Therefore, we also test with larger m = 200, thereby providing more time to the MCTS. With this change, there are several runs keep-
ing the enhancements see Table 3, but it still shows a small influence on this game. 
In addition, we show the arena results (wins of default MCTS minus wins of enhancement) in each training itera-tion before switch happens in each run over 8 repetitions on Othello as an example in Fig 2. In most curves, we can see improving reward balances achieved by default MCTS since it is getting stronger. 
More importantly, we collect all trained models based on our adaptive method, and let them compete with the models trained using fixed I ′ = 5 in a full round-robin tournament where each 2 players play 20 games. 
From Fig 3, we see that, generally, on both Connect Four and Othello, all fixed I ′ achieve higher Elo ratings than the Baseline, which was also reported in [Wang et al., 2020c]). And all adaptive switch models also perform better than the Baseline. Besides, for each enhancement, it is important that the Elo ratings of the adaptive switch models are higher than for the fixed I ′ method, which suggests that our adap-tive switch method leads to better performance than the fixed I ′ method when controlling the warm-start iteration length. 
0 4 8 12 16 20 
Iteration 
40 
30 
20 
10 
0 
10 
20 
Ba la 
nc e 
run1 run2 run3 run4 run5 run6 run7 run8 Balance=0 
(a) Rollout 
0 4 8 12 16 20 
Iteration 
40 
30 
20 
10 
0 
10 
20 
Ba la 
nc e 
run1 run2 run3 run4 run5 run6 run7 run8 Balance=0 
(b) Rave 
0 4 8 12 16 20 
Iteration 
40 
30 
20 
10 
0 
10 
20 
Ba la 
nc e 
run1 run2 run3 run4 run5 run6 run7 run8 Balance=0 
(c) RoRa 
0 4 8 12 16 20 
Iteration 
40 
30 
20 
10 
0 
10 
20 
Ba la 
nc e 
run1 run2 run3 run4 run5 run6 run7 run8 Balance=0 
(d) WRo 
0 4 8 12 16 20 
Iteration 
40 
30 
20 
10 
0 
10 
20 
Ba la 
nc e 
run1 run2 run3 run4 run5 run6 run7 run8 Balance=0 
(e) WRoRa 
Figure 2: Reward balances of default MCTS while competing with different enhancements in self-play arena for 6×6 Othello. Exceed-ing 0 means default MCTS defeats the enhancement, switch occurs.
Baseline Rollout Rave RoRa WRo WRoRa −150 
−125 
−100 
−75 
−50 
−25 
0 
25 
50 
75 
100 
125 
E lo 
ra tin 
g 
Baseline Fixed I’ AdaptiveSwitch 
(a) Connect Four 
Baseline Rollout Rave RoRa WRo WRoRa −150 
−125 
−100 
−75 
−50 
−25 
0 
25 
50 
75 
100 
125 
E lo 
ra tin 
g 
Baseline Fixed I’ AdaptiveSwitch 
(b) Othello 
Figure 3: Comparison of adaptive switch method versus fixed I ′ based on a full tournament for 6×6 Connect Four and Othello 
Specifically, we find that for Connect Four, WRo and RoRa achieve the higher Elo Ratings (see Fig 3(a)) and for Othello, WRoRa performs best (see Fig 3(b)), which reproduces the consistent conclusion (at least one combination enhancement performs better in different games) as [Wang et al., 2020c]). 
In addition, for Connect Four, comparing the tuning results in Fig 1 and the switch iterations by our method in Table 3, we find that our method generally needs a shorter warm-start phase than employing a fixed I ′. The reason could be that in our method, there are always 2 different players playing the game, and they provide more diverse training data than a pure self-play player. In consequence, the neural network also improves more quickly, which is highly desired. 
Note that while we use the default parameter setting for training in the Gobang game, the switch occurs at the first iteration. And even though we enlarge the simulation times for MCTS, only a few training runs shortly keep using the enhancements. We therefore presume that it is meaningless to further perform the tournament comparison for Gobang. 
7 Discussion and Conclusion Since AlphaGo Zero’ results, self-play has become a default approach for generating training data tabula rasa, disregard-ing other information for training. However, if there is a way to obtain better training examples from the start, why not use them, as has been done recently in StarCraft (see Deep-Mind’s AlphaStar [Vinyals et al., 2019]). In addition [Wang et al., 2020c] investigate the possibility of utilizing MCTS en-hancements to improve AlphaZero-like self-play. They em-bed Rollout, RAVE and combinations as enhancements at the start period of iterative self-play training and tested this on small board games. Since the neural network and the MCTS statistics are initialized to random weights and zero, self-play suffers from a cold-start problem, and starting from scratch can lead to unstable learning at the start of the training. These problems can be cured by feeding human expert data or run-ning MCTS enhancements or similar methods in order to generate expert data for training the neural network before switching to pure self-play. (Not unlike RAVE warm-starts the winrate statistics of the original MCTS in 2007.) 
Confirming [Wang et al., 2020c], we find that finding an optimal value of fixed I ′ is difficult, therefore, we propose an adaptive method for deciding when to switch. We also use Rollout, RAVE, and combinations with network values to quickly improve MCTS tree statistics (using RAVE) with meaningful information (using Rollout) before we switch to Baseline-like self-play training. We employed the same games, namely the 6x6 versions of Gobang, Connect Four, and Othello. In these experiments, we find that, for different games, and even different training runs for the same game, the new adaptive method generally switches at different iter-ations. This indicates the noise in the neural network training progress for different runs. After 100 self-play iterations, we still see the effects of the warm-start enhancements as play-ing strength has improved in many cases, and for all enhance-ments, our method performs better than the method proposed in [Wang et al., 2020c] with I ′ set to 5. In addition, some con-clusions are consistent to [Wang et al., 2020c], for example, there is also at least one combination that performs better. 
The new adaptive method works especially well on Othello and Connect Four, ”deep” games with a moderate branching factor, and less well on Gobang, which has a larger branching factor. In the self-play arena, the default MCTS is already quite strong, and for games with a short and wide episode, the MCTS enhancements do not benefit much. Short game lengths reach terminal states early, and MCTS can use the true reward information more often, resulting in a higher chance of winning. Since, Rollout still needs to simulate, with a lim-ited simulation count it is likely to not choose a winning ter-minal state but a state that has the same average value as the terminal state. In this situation, in a short game episodes, MCTS works better than the enhancement with T ′=15. With ongoing training of the neural network, both players become stronger, and as the game length becomes longer, I ′ = 5 works better than the the Baseline. 
Our experiments are with small games. Adaptive warm-start works best in deeper games, suggesting a larger ben-efit for bigger games with deeper lines. Future work in-cludes larger games with deeper lines, and using different but stronger enhancements to generate training examples.
References [Browne et al., 2012] Cameron B Browne, Edward Pow-
ley, Daniel Whitehouse, Simon M Lucas, Peter I Cowl-ing, Philipp Rohlfshagen, Stephen Tavener, Diego Perez, Spyridon Samothrakis, and Simon Colton. A survey of monte carlo tree search methods. IEEE Transactions on Computational Intelligence and AI in games, 4(1):1–43, 2012. 
[Coulom, 2008] Rémi Coulom. Whole-history rating: A bayesian rating system for players of time-varying strength. In International Conference on Computers and Games, pages 113–124. Springer, 2008. 
[Gelly and Silver, 2007] Sylvain Gelly and David Silver. Combining online and offline knowledge in uct. In Pro-ceedings of the 24th international conference on Machine learning, pages 273–280, 2007. 
[Gelly and Silver, 2011] Sylvain Gelly and David Silver. Monte-carlo tree search and rapid action value estima-tion in computer go. Artificial Intelligence, 175(11):1856– 1875, 2011. 
[Nair, 2018] Surag Nair. Alphazero general. https://github. com/suragnair/alpha-zero-general, 2018. Accessed May, 2018. 
[Plaat, 2020] Aske Plaat. Learning to Play: Reinforcement Learning and Games. Springer Nature, 2020. 
[Runarsson and Lucas, 2005] Thomas Philip Runarsson and Simon M Lucas. Coevolution versus self-play tempo-ral difference learning for acquiring position evaluation in small-board go. IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Com-putation, 9(6):628–640, 2005. 
[Schmidhuber, 2015] Jürgen Schmidhuber. Deep learning in neural networks: An overview. Neural networks, 61:85– 117, 2015. 
[Segler et al., 2018] Marwin HS Segler, Mike Preuss, and Mark P Waller. Planning chemical syntheses with deep neural networks and symbolic ai. Nature, 555(7698):604– 610, 2018. 
[Silver et al., 2016] David Silver, Aja Huang, Chris J Maddi-son, Arthur Guez, Laurent Sifre, George Van Den Driess-che, Julian Schrittwieser, Ioannis Antonoglou, Veda Pan-neershelvam, Marc Lanctot, et al. Mastering the game of go with deep neural networks and tree search. nature, 529(7587):484–489, 2016. 
[Silver et al., 2017] David Silver, Julian Schrittwieser, Karen Simonyan, Ioannis Antonoglou, Aja Huang, Arthur Guez, Thomas Hubert, Lucas Baker, Matthew Lai, Adrian Bolton, et al. Mastering the game of go without human knowledge. nature, 550(7676):354–359, 2017. 
[Silver et al., 2018] David Silver, Thomas Hubert, Julian Schrittwieser, Ioannis Antonoglou, Matthew Lai, Arthur Guez, Marc Lanctot, Laurent Sifre, Dharshan Kumaran, Thore Graepel, et al. A general reinforcement learning algorithm that masters chess, shogi, and go through self-play. Science, 362(6419):1140–1144, 2018. 
[Sutton and Barto, 2018] Richard S Sutton and Andrew G Barto. Reinforcement learning: An introduction. MIT press, 2018. 
[Tesauro, 1995] Gerald Tesauro. Temporal difference learn-ing and td-gammon. Communications of the ACM, 38(3):58–68, 1995. 
[Vinyals et al., 2019] Oriol Vinyals, Igor Babuschkin, Woj-ciech M Czarnecki, Michaël Mathieu, Andrew Dudzik, Junyoung Chung, David H Choi, Richard Powell, Timo Ewalds, Petko Georgiev, et al. Grandmaster level in star-craft ii using multi-agent reinforcement learning. Nature, 575(7782):350–354, 2019. 
[Wang et al., 2018] Hui Wang, Michael Emmerich, and Aske Plaat. Assessing the potential of classical q-learning in general game playing. In Benelux Conference on Artifi-cial Intelligence, pages 138–150. Springer, 2018. 
[Wang et al., 2019] Hui Wang, Michael Emmerich, Mike Preuss, and Aske Plaat. Alternative loss functions in alphazero-like self-play. In 2019 IEEE Symposium Se-ries on Computational Intelligence (SSCI), pages 155– 162. IEEE, 2019. 
[Wang et al., 2020a] Hui Wang, Michael Emmerich, Mike Preuss, and Aske Plaat. Analysis of hyper-parameters for small games: Iterations or epochs in self-play? arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.05988, 2020. 
[Wang et al., 2020b] Hui Wang, Mike Preuss, Michael Em-merich, and Aske Plaat. Tackling morpion solitaire with alphazero-like ranked reward reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.07970, 2020. 
[Wang et al., 2020c] Hui Wang, Mike Preuss, and Aske Plaat. Warm-start alphazero self-play search enhance-ments. In Proceedings of the Parallel Problem Solving from Nature – PPSN XVI, pages 528–542, 2020. 
[Wu, 2019] David J Wu. Accelerating self-play learning in go. arXiv preprint arXiv:1902.10565, 2019.