> Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2502.06900

Polynomial Regret Concentration of UCB for Non-Deterministic State Transitions 
Can Cömer1*, Jannis Blüml1,2*, Cedric Derstroff1,2*, Kristian Kersting1,2,3,4 
1Computer Science Department, Technical University Darmstadt 2Hessian Center for Artificial Intelligence (hessian.AI) 
3Centre for Cognitive Science 4German Research Center for Artificial Intelligence (DFKI) 
jannis.blueml@tu-darmstadt.de, cedric.derstroff@tu-darmstadt.de 
Abstract 
Monte Carlo Tree Search (MCTS) has proven effective in solving decision-making problems in perfect information set-tings. However, its application to stochastic and imperfect in-formation domains remains limited. This paper extends the theoretical framework of MCTS to stochastic domains by addressing non-deterministic state transitions, where actions lead to probabilistic outcomes. Specifically, building on the work of Shah, Xie, and Xu (2022), we derive polynomial re-gret concentration bounds for the Upper Confidence Bound algorithm in multi-armed bandit problems with stochastic transitions, offering improved theoretical guarantees. Our pri-mary contribution is proving that these bounds also apply to non-deterministic environments, ensuring robust perfor-mance in stochastic settings. This broadens the applicability of MCTS to real-world decision-making problems with prob-abilistic outcomes, such as in autonomous systems and finan-cial decision-making. 
Introduction Monte Carlo Tree Search (MCTS) (Kocsis and Szepesvári 2006; Chaslot et al. 2008) has become a cornerstone for solving complex decision-making problems in perfect infor-mation settings, as demonstrated by its success in games like Chess and Go (Silver et al. 2017, 2018). Its ability to effi-ciently balance exploration and exploitation through the Up-per Confidence Bound (UCB) mechanism has made it one of the most effective methods in domains where the environ-ment is fully observable and transitions between states are deterministic. The widespread success of MCTS in perfect information games has led to its adoption in various real-world applications where decision-making based on com-plete information is critical. 
Now imagine running MCTS on the non-deterministic FrozenLake environment; see Figure 1 and appendix. Here, we ran MCTS with different numbers of simulations. Can we trust these results? Can we provide guarantees? The is-sue is that guarantees for running MCTS are only known for deterministic state transitions. We extend them to stochastic domains by addressing non-deterministic state transitions. 
Applying MCTS to stochastic and imperfect information domains remains an ongoing challenge. In such environ-ments, agents must act based on incomplete or uncertain 
*These authors contributed equally. 
210 211 212 213 214 0.05 
0.12 
0.19 
0.26 
0.33 
Simulations n 
D is 
co un 
te d 
R et 
ur n 
Figure 1: Running MCTS on 4× 4 FrozenLake: The higher n, the better the performance. Is this by accident? No, we es-tablish a polynomial regret concentration for running MCTS on stochastic and imperfect information domains. 
data. These domains are common in theoretical settings, such as strategic games like poker, and real-world applica-tions, such as autonomous vehicle navigation and financial decision-making. In these scenarios, the environment can behave unpredictably due to probabilistic transitions, mak-ing it difficult for traditional MCTS to perform optimally. 
Various methods, such as Perfect Information Monte Carlo (PIMC) (Ginsberg 2001) or Information Set MCTS (ISMCTS) (Cowling, Powley, and Whitehouse 2012), have been proposed to address these complexities by adapting MCTS to handle imperfect information. These adaptations have proven effective in building strong baselines (Blüml, Czech, and Kersting 2023) and even for world champion-level agents like GIB (Ginsberg 1999). Furthermore, re-cent approaches like ISMCTS-BR (Timbers et al. 2022) compute approximate best responses in two-player zero-sum games with imperfect information, further expanding the utility of MCTS in these complex settings. While these methods have demonstrated empirical success, their theo-retical underpinnings in non-deterministic environments re-main limited. Specifically, there are only a few formal guar-antees on their exploration efficiency in stochastic domains, where probabilistic transitions between states introduce ad-ditional challenges. Without these guarantees, the perfor-mance of MCTS-based methods like ISMCTS or ISMCTS-BR in complex, uncertain environments may suffer from suboptimal exploration and is not guaranteed to converge, hindering their applicability in critical real-world scenarios. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Our contribution addresses this gap by extending the the-oretical framework of MCTS to include non-deterministic transitions with fixed probabilities. Building on the work of Shah, Xie, and Xu (2022), we derive polynomial regret con-centration bounds for UCB in settings where transitions be-tween states are stochastic with fixed probabilities. These bounds ensure regret concentration even in uncertain en-vironments, guaranteeing efficient exploration and enhanc-ing the robustness of MCTS in real-world decision-making problems where probabilistic outcomes are prevalent. 
We start by introducing the key concepts before present-ing the theoretical framework and analysis of MCTS in stochastic domains with non-deterministic transitions. We provide a sketch of the proof demonstrating polynomial re-gret concentration for such settings before we discuss prac-tical implications and related work. Finally, the paper con-cludes with a summary of our contributions. 
Preliminaries In this section, we introduce the key concepts and algorithms that form the foundation of our work, including the basics of MCTS, the UCB algorithm, and the role of regret concentra-tion in decision-making processes under uncertainty. 
Multi-Armed Bandit Problems (MABs) The core decision-making problem MCTS addresses can be related to the classical Multi-Armed Bandit problem (MAB) (Thompson 1933; Berry and Fristedt 1985; Cesa-Bianchi and Lugosi 2006). In an MAB, an agent must choose one arm (action) from a set of possible arms, each associated with an unknown reward distribution. The objective is to maximize cumulative rewards over time by balancing the ex-ploration of less-known arms with exploiting arms that have historically yielded higher rewards. 
Upper Confidence Bound: At each time step t, an arm It ∈ [K] is selected according to 
It+1 = argmax i∈[K] 
Xi,s + β 1 ξ t 
α ξ sη−1︸ ︷︷ ︸ 
=Bt,s 
, (1) 
the upper confidence bound of arm i at time t after it was chosen s = Ti(t) times. Xi,s is the respective empirical av-erage reward and β, ξ, η, α are constants. Bt,s is the explo-ration bonus. To avoid division by zero, we define Bt,0 = ∞, which ensures that each arm is explored once first. If more than one maximum exists, one is chosen at random. 
Application to Trees. In a game tree, where nodes repre-sent states and edges represent actions, each tree layer can be treated as a separate MAB; as each MAB is based on the re-sults of the MABs successive layers, complex dependencies arise, making non-leaf layers non-stationary. Successive ac-tion selection by applying a UCB variant to every such MAB is called Upper Confidence bound applied to Trees (UCT) (Kocsis and Szepesvári 2006). 
Monte Carlo Tree Search (MCTS) MCTS (Kocsis and Szepesvári 2006; Chaslot et al. 2008) is an iterative algorithm designed to solve decision-making 
problems by building and traversing a search tree. Each node represents a state, and each edge corresponds to a possible action. The algorithm comprises four key phases: Selection, Expansion, Simulation, and Backpropagation. 
MCTS is highly effective in perfect information settings like Chess and Go, as evidenced by its use in advanced algo-rithms such as AlphaZero (Silver et al. 2018). MCTS incre-mentally refines the estimates of state-action values through repeated simulations, improving decision quality over time. 
In MCTS, each state-action pair can be seen as an arm in the MAB framework, where actions are selected using UCT. 
Regret and Regret Concentration In decision-making problems, regret measures the difference between the cumulative reward obtained by the optimal pol-icy and the reward achieved by the agent’s policy over time. Minimizing regret is crucial for ensuring that the agent’s per-formance improves as more decisions are made. 
In MCTS, where each decision node can be modeled as a multi-armed bandit problem, it is important to under-stand how regret concentrates around its expected value. This is essential for providing performance and convergence guarantees. Shah, Xie, and Xu (2022) demonstrated that UCT with a polynomial exploration bonus (cf. Equation (1)) achieves polynomial regret concentration in deterministic environments, where the outcomes of actions are certain. 
Theoretical Analysis Shah, Xie, and Xu (2022) demonstrated that UCT with poly-nomial exploration bonuses leads to polynomial regret con-centration in deterministic environments, where transitions between states are fully predictable. However, many real-world decision-making problems, including games with im-perfect information and applications involving stochastic systems, necessitate modeling uncertainty in state transi-tions. In these scenarios, actions can lead to multiple possi-ble outcomes, each with a specific probability, complicating the straightforward application of UCT. 
To address this gap, we extend the theoretical guarantees of UCT to environments with non-deterministic but fixed transition probabilities. This extension is vital for domains such as poker, financial modeling, and autonomous systems, where decision-makers must navigate uncertainty due to the non-deterministic nature of the environment. While Kocsis and Szepesvári (2006) have claimed that an exponential ex-ploration bonus achieves exponential regret concentration, this only holds for the leaf layer, as it relies on independent and identically distributed reward sequences (Auer, Cesa-Bianchi, and Fischer 2002). Recent work has shown that this approach does not maintain exponential regret concentration throughout the search tree (Shah, Xie, and Xu 2022; Audib-ert, Munos, and Szepesvári 2009). We adapt their proof and show that the UCB algorithm can handle non-deterministic transitions effectively. In this context, each action taken at a given state can lead to one of several possible next states, each governed by fixed transition probabilities. We model this situation as a multi-armed bandit problem, where each arm (action) transitions into a set of potential states, each
with its own reward distribution. A formal description with necessary assumptions is provided in the next paragraph. 
Non-deterministic non-stationary Multi-Armed Bandit Problem: Let there be K actions the agent can choose from. Each action i ∈ [K] = {1, . . . ,K} is connected to Ki ≥ 1 possible successive states, which are chosen at random. The probability of sampling state j ∈ [Ki] after choosing action i ∈ [K] is denoted by pij ∈ [0, 1] with∑Ki 
j=1 p i j = 1,∀i ∈ [K]. Let Xi,t denote the reward ob-
tained by selecting action i ∈ [K] for the t-th time. Further let X(i) 
j,s be the reward obtained after choosing action i ∈ [K] 
and sampling state j ∈ [Ki] for the s-th time. Hence Xi,t =∑Ki 
j=1 χ{Ji t=j}X 
(i) 
j,T (i) j (t) 
, where χ ∈ {0, 1} is the indicator 
function, J i t ∈ [Ki] is the index of the state that was sam-
pled after action i was chosen and T (i) j (t) = 
∑t s=1 χ{Ji 
s=j} is the number of times j ∈ [Ki] was sampled after i ∈ [K] was chosen until time t ∈ N. Analogously, let It ∈ [K] be the index of the action that was chosen at time t ∈ N and Ti(t) = 
∑t s=1 χ{Is=i} the number of times it was chosen 
until time t ∈ N. This setup is illustrated in Figure 2. The goal is to find the action with the highest expected av-erage reward in the long run. For now, we assume that such an action exists and denote it as i∗ ∈ [K] and that its em-pirical average converges in expectation to a value that we denote as µi∗. We will later show (Theorem 3) that this as-sumption is indeed true. Further, we denote its distance to the converged expected empirical average of the second best action as ∆min, which we also formally define during the proof (cf. Equation (8)). 
Additionally, we have to make two important assumptions about the underlying MAB. 
Assumptions: First, we assume bounded reward se-quences X 
(i) j,t ∈ [−R,R],∀i ∈ [K], j ∈ [Ki], t ∈ N and 
some R ∈ R+. Next, we allow the reward sequences to be non-stationary, i.e., their expected value might change over time. Further, we assume the following properties for their empirical averages Xi 
j,n = 1 n 
∑n t=1 X 
i j,t. For every 
arm i ∈ [K] we have: 1. (Convergence): For every j ∈ [Ki] there exist µi 
j ∈ [−R,R] such that 
µi j,n := E 
( Xi 
j,n 
) n−→∞−−−−→ µi j (2) 
2. (Concentration): There exist some constants β > 1, ξ > 0, 1 
2 ≤ η < 1 such that for every z ∈ R with z ≥ 1 and every n ∈ N, we have 
P ( nXi 
j,n − nµi j ≥ nηz 
) ≤ β 
zξ , 
P ( nXi 
j,n − nµi j ≤ −nηz 
) ≤ β 
zξ , 
(3) 
which holds for every possible next state j ∈ [Ki]. Based on these assumptions, we can now formulate 
our theoretical main result, establishing polynomial regret concentration for non-deterministic, non-stationary MABs, which we will then prove. 
X (1) 
K1,T (1) K1 
(T1(t)) 
·· · 
X (1) 
2,T (1) 2 (T1(t)) 
X (1) 
1,T (1) 1 (T1(t)) 
X (K) 
1,T (K) 1 (TK(t)) 
X (K) 
2,T (K) 2 (TK(t)) 
·· · 
X (K) 
KK ,T (K) KK 
(TK(t)) 
·· · 
X1,T1(t) 
XK,TK(t) 
Xt 
1 
K 
p11 
p12 
p1K1 
pK1 
pK2 
pKKK 
Figure 2: Illustration of non-deterministic, non-stationary Multi-Armed Bandit problem. The upper confidence bound algorithm selects an action within the first layer, and a ran-dom transition is applied within the second. 
Theorem 1. For a non-deterministic, non-stationary MAB satisfying properties 1 (Conver-gence) and 2 (Concentration), the value Xn = 1 n 
∑K i=1 
∑Ki 
j=1 T i j (Ti(n))X 
i j,T i 
j (Ti(n)) , obtained by ap-
plying the presented UCB algorithm with polynomial exploration bonus (Equation (1)) with appropriate param-eter α > 2 such that ξη (1− η) ≤ α < ξ (1− η) and randomly sampling transitions j according to probabilities {pij ∈ [0, 1], i ∈ [K], j ∈ [Ki]} satisfies properties: 
1. (Convergence): There exists µi∗ ∈ [−R,R] such that 
µn := E ( Xn 
) n−→∞−−−−→ µi∗ (4) 
2. (Concentration): There exist constants β′′ > 1, ξ′′ > 0, 1 
2 ≤ η′′ < 1 such that ∀n ∈ N, z ∈ R with n, z ≥ 1 we have 
P ( nXn − nµi∗ ≥ nη′′ 
z ) ≤ β′′ 
zξ′′ , 
P ( nXn − nµi∗ ≤ −nη′′ 
z ) ≤ β′′ 
zξ′′ , 
(5) 
where η′′ = α ξ(1−η) , ξ′′ = α − 1, and β′′ depends on R, 
K, ∆min , β, ξ, α, η and K1, . . . ,KK , see Equation (27). 
Proof Sketch of Theorem 1 For readability and clarity, we provide only a brief outline of the proof, establishing polynomial regret concentration for a non-deterministic, non-stationary MAB. The full proof and Theorems 2 and 3 can be found in the appendix. 
Key Idea: As illustrated in Figure 2, we divide our non-deterministic non-stationary MAB into two phases, one rep-resenting the selection by the UCB algorithm and one repre-senting the random transitions.
Step 1: Selection Phase The goal is to apply the findings of Shah, Xie, and Xu (2022) for deterministic transitions. To this end, we assume that the reward sequences {Xi,t : t ∈ N},∀i ∈ [K] of the intermediate layer already satisfy the convergence and concentration properties for constants β′, ξ′, η′, from which we deduce that the properties are also satisfied at the root for constants β′′, ξ′′, η′′ (Theorem 2). Step 2: Transition Phase The goal is to show that the as-sumptions of step 1 indeed follow from the assumptions of Theorem 1, i.e., the rewards {Xi 
j,t : j ∈ [Ki], t ∈ N},∀i ∈ [K] satisfy the convergence and concentration properties for constants β, ξ, η. First, by utilizing the independent and identically distributed nature of fixed random transitions, we derive concentration bounds for T i 
j (n), i ∈ [K], j ∈ [Ki] against their expectations using Hoeffding’s inequality (Lemma 1). We utilize these bounds to establish the desired concentration bounds for the rewards {Xi,t : t ∈ N},∀i ∈ [K] for constants β′, ξ′, η′ (Theorem 3). Step 3: Combining Results Lastly, by combining the con-centration results of steps 1 and 2, we obtain that the concen-tration at the root with constants β′′, ξ′′, η′′ can be deduced by the concentration at the leaves with constants β, ξ, η. Conclusion: The proof establishes that the regret concen-trates polynomially around zero, even in non-deterministic environments. This guarantees that the long-term perfor-mance of the algorithm approximates the optimal policy with high probability. This concludes the proof. 
Practical Implications Theorem 1 equips MCTS with convergence guarantees. In practical terms, this means when solving a non-deterministic problem with fixed transition probabilities and a fixed hori-zon, if we can estimate ∆min, we can calculate the explo-ration constants so that MCTS is guaranteed to return the optimal solution in the limit. In the next step, we can cal-culate an n that returns an ϵ-optimal solution with a fixed probability. This is very powerful in safety-critical domains. 
We illustrate this in an empirical experiment by analyzing the regret development over increasing simulations n (cf. Figure 3, and the appendix). Shown is the regret of i∗ of state 14 (left of the goal) after n simulations (µi∗ − Xi∗,n) for different n averaged over 10 random seeds. We can ob-serve that the regret not only decreases with higher n but it is also more concentrated, i.e., the standard deviation over the seeds also decreases. This outcome is expected, given that Theorem 1 explicitly addresses this type of behavior. 
Related Work UCB, introduced by Auer, Cesa-Bianchi, and Fischer (2002), is fundamental in addressing the exploration-exploitation trade-off in MAB problems, offering theoreti-cal guarantees for minimizing cumulative regret. Kocsis and Szepesvári (2006) extended UCB to MCTS via the UCT algorithm, which has been key to MCTS’s success in per-fect information settings. Theoretical exploration of MCTS in non-deterministic and stochastic environments has been limited, with recent studies by Dam, Maillard, and Kauf-mann (2024) examining its application in such scenarios. 
210 211 212 213 214 215 216 217 218 219 220 0.26 0.28 0.30 0.32 0.34 0.36 
Simulations n 
R eg 
re t 
Figure 3: As predicted by Theorem 1, in FrozenLake, the regret decreases and shows greater concentration as n grows. 
Recent advancements like AlphaZero (Silver et al. 2017, 2018) and AlphaFold (Jumper et al. 2021) have successfully combined deep learning with MCTS in perfect information games, but theoretical guarantees for exploration in complex stochastic or imperfect environments remain underexplored. The exploration-exploitation dynamics in stochastic MABs have also been studied by Audibert, Munos, and Szepesvári (2009) and Bubeck and Cesa-Bianchi (2012), influencing our adaptation of UCB for probabilistic transitions. Adap-tions of MCTS to stochastic or imperfect information set-tings have been studied, including PIMC (Ginsberg 2001; Long et al. 2010) and ISMCTS by Cowling, Powley, and Whitehouse (2012). Yet, these works lack the theoretical guarantees for stochastic domains provided by our work. 
Discussion and Conclusion This paper extends the theoretical foundations of MCTS and derives polynomial regret concentration bounds for non-deterministic state transitions by building on the work of Shah, Xie, and Xu (2022). This ensures that MCTS can explore and operate effectively in stochastic environments, making these algorithms applicable to a broader range of real-world decision-making tasks. More importantly, this means that given enough resources, MCTS is guaranteed to always converge to the optimal solution in these sce-narios. Thus, this work improves decision-making in uncer-tain domains by enhancing the reliability and safety of au-tonomous systems. However, uncertainty and probability es-timates must be handled carefully, especially in high-stakes areas like healthcare. Theoretical guarantees are an impor-tant first step toward building trust in these systems, but rigorous testing and validation remain essential to mitigate risks. Although our analysis addresses non-deterministic environments, it focuses on fixed transition probabilities. This assumption may not always hold in real-world sce-narios where transition dynamics often evolve over time, limiting the framework’s applicability to domains where such assumptions are feasible. Extending this work to non-stationary environments, where transition probabilities vary over time, will enhance its applicability in domains, such as those involving humans, where systems must adapt in real-time. Another key direction is empirical validation of these theoretical findings in real-world applications, such as au-tonomous systems or high-frequency trading, studying the practical implications and reliability in detail. By improv-ing MCTS’ guarantees and ability to handle uncertainty, we hope to inspire further exploration and integration of these concepts into applied AI systems across various domains.
References Audibert, J.; Munos, R.; and Szepesvári, C. 2009. Exploration-exploitation tradeoff using variance estimates in multi-armed bandits. Theoretical Computer Science, 410(19): 1876–1902. Auer, P.; Cesa-Bianchi, N.; and Fischer, P. 2002. Finite-time Analysis of the Multiarmed Bandit Problem. Machine Learning, 47(2-3): 235–256. Berry, D. A.; and Fristedt, B. 1985. Bandit problems: se-quential allocation of experiments (Monographs on statis-tics and applied probability). London: Chapman and Hall, 5(71-87): 7–7. Blüml, J.; Czech, J.; and Kersting, K. 2023. AlphaZe∗∗: AlphaZero-like baselines for imperfect information games are surprisingly strong. Frontiers in Artificial Intelligence, 6. Bubeck, S.; and Cesa-Bianchi, N. 2012. Regret Analysis of Stochastic and Nonstochastic Multi-armed Bandit Prob-lems. Foundations and Trends® in Machine Learning, 5(1): 1–122. Cesa-Bianchi, N.; and Lugosi, G. 2006. Prediction, learn-ing, and games. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-84108-5. Chaslot, G.; Bakkes, S.; Szita, I.; and Spronck, P. 2008. Monte-Carlo Tree Search: A New Framework for Game AI. In Darken, C.; and Mateas, M., eds., Proceedings of the Fourth Artificial Intelligence and Interactive Digital Enter-tainment Conference, October 22-24, 2008, Stanford, Cali-fornia, USA. The AAAI Press. Cowling, P. I.; Powley, E. J.; and Whitehouse, D. 2012. In-formation Set Monte Carlo Tree Search. IEEE Transactions on Computational Intelligence and AI in Games, 4(2): 120– 143. Dam, T. Q.; Maillard, O.-A.; and Kaufmann, E. 2024. Power Mean Estimation in Stochastic Monte-Carlo Tree Search. In The 40th Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intel-ligence. Ginsberg, M. L. 1999. GIB: Steps Toward an Expert-Level Bridge-Playing Program. In Dean, T., ed., Proceedings of the Sixteenth International Joint Conference on Artificial In-telligence, IJCAI 99, Stockholm, Sweden, July 31 - August 6, 1999. 2 Volumes, 1450 pages, 584–593. Morgan Kaufmann. Ginsberg, M. L. 2001. GIB: Imperfect Information in a Computationally Challenging Game. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research, 14: 303–358. Jumper, J.; Evans, R.; Pritzel, A.; Green, T.; Figurnov, M.; Ronneberger, O.; Tunyasuvunakool, K.; Bates, R.; Žı́dek, A.; Potapenko, A.; et al. 2021. Highly accurate protein struc-ture prediction with AlphaFold. Nature, 596(7873): 583– 589. Kocsis, L.; and Szepesvári, C. 2006. Bandit Based Monte-Carlo Planning. In Fürnkranz, J.; Scheffer, T.; and Spiliopoulou, M., eds., Machine Learning: ECML 2006, 17th European Conference on Machine Learning, Berlin, Germany, September 18-22, 2006, Proceedings, volume 4212 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, 282–293. Springer. 
Long, J. R.; Sturtevant, N. R.; Buro, M.; and Furtak, T. 2010. Understanding the Success of Perfect Information Monte Carlo Sampling in Game Tree Search. In Fox, M.; and Poole, D., eds., Proceedings of the Twenty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, AAAI 2010, Atlanta, Georgia, USA, July 11-15, 2010, 134–140. AAAI Press. Shah, D.; Xie, Q.; and Xu, Z. 2022. Nonasymptotic Analysis of Monte Carlo Tree Search. Operations Research, 70(6): 3234–3260. Silver, D.; Hubert, T.; Schrittwieser, J.; Antonoglou, I.; Lai, M.; Guez, A.; Lanctot, M.; Sifre, L.; Kumaran, D.; Graepel, T.; et al. 2018. A general reinforcement learning algorithm that masters chess, shogi, and Go through self-play. Science, 362(6419): 1140–1144. Silver, D.; Schrittwieser, J.; Simonyan, K.; Antonoglou, I.; Huang, A.; Guez, A.; Hubert, T.; Baker, L.; Lai, M.; Bolton, A.; Chen, Y.; Lillicrap, T. P.; Hui, F.; Sifre, L.; van den Driessche, G.; Graepel, T.; and Hassabis, D. 2017. Mas-tering the game of Go without human knowledge. Nature, 550(7676): 354–359. Thompson, W. R. 1933. On the likelihood that one unknown probability exceeds another in view of the evidence of two samples. Biometrika, 25(3-4): 285–294. Timbers, F.; Bard, N.; Lockhart, E.; Lanctot, M.; Schmid, M.; Burch, N.; Schrittwieser, J.; Hubert, T.; and Bowling, M. 2022. Approximate Exploitability: Learning a Best Re-sponse. In Raedt, L. D., ed., Proceedings of the Thirty-First International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, IJ-CAI 2022, Vienna, Austria, 23-29 July 2022, 3487–3493. ij-cai.org. Towers, M.; Kwiatkowski, A.; Terry, J.; Balis, J. U.; De Cola, G.; Deleu, T.; Goulão, M.; Kallinteris, A.; Krim-mel, M.; KG, A.; et al. 2024. Gymnasium: A Standard In-terface for Reinforcement Learning Environments. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.17032.
List of Symbols Latin A(t) A helper function (cf. Shah, Xie, and Xu (2022)). 
Bt,s The polynomial exploration bonus for an arm/action chosen s times within t time steps. 
c1 A helper constant (cf. Shah, Xie, and Xu (2022)). 
c2 A helper constant (cf. Shah, Xie, and Xu (2022)). 
e The Euler constant. 
E The expectation. 
f(•) A function. 
h A layer in the search tree. h ∈ {2, . . . ,H}. 
H Finite horizon, also used as a superscript regarding the leaf level of the tree. 
i An arm/action. 
i∗ The optimal arm/action. 
It The selected arm/action at time step t. 
j A sampled transition/edge. 
J i t The sampled transition at time step t after action i ∈ 
[K] was chosen. 
J̃t = J i t for some arbitrary fixed i ∈ [K]. 
[k] Short notation for {1, . . . , k} for some k ∈ N. 
K The number of arms/actions. 
Ki The number of possible successive states after arm/ac-tion i ∈ [K] was selected. 
K̃ = Ki for some arbitrary fixed i ∈ [K]. 
n number of trials/simulations. 
Np A constant that is a minimum for t (cf. Shah, Xie, and Xu (2022)). 
N The set of natural numbers. 
pij The probability of transitioning to state j ∈ [Ki] after choosing arm/action i ∈ [K]. 
p̃j = pij for some arbitrary fixed i ∈ [K]. 
P The probability function. 
R The reward bound. 
R The set of real numbers. 
s A specific number of selections of an arm/action. 
t The current time step. 
Ti(t) The number of selections of arm/action i until time step t. 
T i j (s) The number of times transition j ∈ [Ki] is sampled 
after arm/action i ∈ [K] was selected s times. 
T̃j = T i j for some arbitrary fixed i ∈ [K]. 
Xt The reward obtained at time step t. 
Xi,t The reward obtained after selecting arm/action i for the t−th time. 
Xi j,t The reward obtained after selecting arm/action i ∈ 
[K] and sampling transition j ∈ [Ki] for the t−th time. 
Xn The empirical mean of Xt over n time steps. 
Xi,n The empirical mean of Xi,t after i was selected n times. 
Yt = Xi,t for some arbitrary fixed i ∈ [K]. 
Yj,t = Xi j,t for some arbitrary fixed i ∈ [K]. 
Yn The empirical mean of Yt over n time steps. 
Yj,n The empirical mean of Yj,t after j was sampled n times. 
z The concentration parameter with z ≥ 1. 
Greek α An exploration constant. 
β A constant at the leaf layer. 
β′ A constant for the intermediate layers. 
β′′ A constant at the root. 
βT A constant for the concentration of T i j (n). 
δi,n The deviation from the limit δi,n = µi − µi,n. 
∆min = min i ̸=i∗ 
µi∗ − µi . 
γ The discount factor. 
η A constant at the leaf layer. 
η′ A constant for the intermediate layers. 
η′′ A constant at the root. 
µi The limit of E(Xi,n) for n → ∞. 
µi,n The current E(Xi,n). 
µi j Limit of E(Xi 
j,n) for n → ∞. 
µ̃j = µi j for some arbitrary fixed i ∈ [K]. 
ξ A constant at the leaf layer. 
ξ′ A constant for the intermediate layers. 
ξ′′ A constant at the root. 
Υ Substitute for ∑K 
i=1 Ti(n)Yi,Ti(n). 
χ{•} The indicator function.
Proof of Theorem 1 As illustrated in the proof sketch, we proceed in two steps; the first covers the selection layer, and the second covers the non-deterministic transition layer. 
Non-stationary MAB with deterministic transitions (Shah, Xie, and Xu 2022) This subsection focuses on the first layer of our problem. Assume we have a non-stationary MAB, where the reward sequences {Xi,t ∈ [−R,R], t ∈ N}, i ∈ [K] satisfy the following convergence and concentration properties: 
Assumptions: Intermediate Layer The reward se-quences are allowed to be non-stationary, i.e., their expected value might change over time, but we assume the following properties for their empirical averages Xi,n = 1 
n 
∑n t=1 Xi,t. 
1. (Convergence): For every i ∈ [K] there exist µi ∈ [−R,R] such that 
µi,n := E ( Xi,n 
) n−→∞−−−−→ µi (6) 
2. (Concentration): There exist constants β′ > 1, ξ′ > 0, 1 2 ≤ η′ < 1 such that for every z ∈ R with z ≥ 1 and n ∈ N we have for every i ∈ [K] 
P ( nXi,n − nµi ≥ n 
η′ z ) 
≤ β′ 
zξ′ , 
P ( nXi,n − nµi ≤ −n 
η′ z ) 
≤ β′ 
zξ′ . 
(7) 
As introduced before, we let i∗ ∈ [K] be the action with the highest reward with respect to the converged empirical average reward values, i.e., i∗ = argmaxi∈[K] µi. Without loss of generality, let this action be unique. Additionally, let δi,n := µi,n − µi, i ∈ [K], n ∈ N be the difference be-tween the currently expected reward of action i ∈ [K] and its converged value and 
∆min = min i∈[K]\{i∗} 
µi∗ − µi (8) 
the distance between the optimal reward and the reward ob-tained by the second best action. Theorem 2. For a, possibly non-stationary, MAB satisfy-ing the convergence and concentration property, the value Xn = 1 
n 
∑K i=1 Ti(n)Xi,Ti(n) obtained by the presented 
UCB algorithm (cf. Equation (1)) with appropriate parame-ter α > 2 such that ξ′η′ (1− η′) ≤ α < ξ′ (1− η′) satisfies properties: 1. (Convergence):∣∣∣E(Xn − µi∗ 
)∣∣∣ ≤ ∣∣∣∣δi∗,n + 1 
n (2R (K − 1))× 2 
∆minβ ′ 1 ξ′ (1 − η′) 
η′ α 
ξ′(1−η′) + 2 
α − 2 + 1 
∣∣∣∣∣∣ , i.e., lim 
n−→∞ E ( Xn 
) = µi∗. 
(9) 
2. (Concentration): There exist constants β′′ > 1, ξ′′ > 0, 1 
2 ≤ η′′ < 1 such that ∀n ∈ N, z ∈ R with n, z ≥ 1 we have 
P ( nXn − nµi∗ ≥ n 
η′′ z ) 
≤ β′′ 
zξ′′ , 
P ( nXn − nµi∗ ≤ −n 
η′′ z ) 
≤ β′′ 
zξ′′ , 
(10) 
Ys 
Y2,T̃2(s) Y1,T̃1(s) 
. . . YK̃,T̃ K̃ (s) 
p̃2p̃1 p̃K̃ 
Figure 4: A non-deterministic transition layer where the agent transitions to state j ∈ [K̃] with probability p̃j to re-ceive reward Yj,T̃j(s) 
. 
where η′′ = α ξ′(1−η′) , ξ′′ = α − 1 and β′′ depends on 
R,K,∆min , β ′, ξ′, α, η′ (cf. Shah, Xie, and Xu (2022), 
and Equation (27)). 
Proof. See Shah, Xie, and Xu (2022). 
Non-deterministic Transitions with Fixed Probabilities In this subsection, we observe the second layer of our non-deterministic, non-stationary MAB, representing the ran-dom transitions. To improve readability, we fix some arbi-trary i ∈ [K] and define s := Ti(t) ∈ N, Ys := Xi,s, K̃ := Ki and for j ∈ [K̃] we let Yj,T̃j(s) 
:= Xi j,T i 
j (s) , 
T̃j(s) := T i j (s), µ̃j := µi 
j , p̃j := pij , J̃t := J i t . This setup is 
illustrated in Figure 4. Note that now {χ{J̃t=j} : t ≥ 1} are independent and 
identically distributed for j ∈ [K̃], since the transition prob-abilities are fixed, and P 
( J̃t = j 
) = p̃j ,∀t ∈ N. 
Assumptions: Leaf Layer Again, we allow the reward se-quences {Yj,t : t ≥ 1}, j ∈ [K̃] to be non-stationary, but they fulfill the following properties, that we already know from Theorem 1: 1. (Convergence): For every j ∈ [K̃] there exist µ̃j ∈ 
[−R,R] such that 
µ̃j,n := E ( Yj,n 
) n−→∞−−−−→ µ̃j (11) 
2. (Concentration): There exist constants β > 1, ξ > 0, 1 2 ≤ η < 1 such that for every z ∈ R with z ≥ 1, n ∈ N and j ∈ [K̃], we have 
P ( nYj,n − nµ̃j ≥ n 
η z ) 
≤ β 
zξ , 
P ( nYj,n − nµ̃j ≤ −n 
η z ) 
≤ β 
zξ . 
(12) 
Theorem 3. For a layer with, possibly non-stationary, re-ward sequences {Yj,t : t ≥ 1}, j ∈ [K̃] satisfying properties 
1 and 2, the value Yn = 1 n 
∑K̃ i=1 T̃j(n)Yj,T̃j(n) 
obtained by randomly sampling edges based on the fixed probabilities p̃1, . . . , p̃K̃ ∈ [0, 1] with 
∑K̃ j=1 p̃j = 1 satisfies properties: 
1. (Convergence): For n −→ ∞ we have 
E ( Yn 
) −→ µ̃ := 
K̃∑ j=1 
p̃j µ̃j (13)
2. (Concentration): There exist constants β′ > 1, ξ′ > 0, 1 
2 ≤ η′ < 1 such that ∀n ∈ N, z ∈ R with n, z ≥ 1 we have 
P ( nYn − nµ ≥ n 
η′ z ) 
≤ β′ 
zξ′ , 
P ( nYn − nµ ≤ −n 
η′ z ) 
≤ β′ 
zξ′ , 
(14) 
where ξ′ = ξ, η′ = η and β′ = β2ξ+2RξK̃ξ+1. Before we prove this theorem, note the following lemma. Lemma 1. For every η ∈ [1/2, 1) and any finite ξ > 0 there exist βT > 1 large enough such that ∀n ∈ N, z ∈ R with n, z ≥ 1 and j ∈ [K̃] we have 
P ( T̃j(n) − np̃j ≥ n 
η z ) 
≤ βT 
zξ , 
P ( T̃j(n) − np̃j ≤ −n 
η z ) 
≤ βT 
zξ . 
(15) 
Proof. As a starting point, we observe that 
E ( T̃j(n) 
) = E 
( n∑ 
t=1 
χ{J̃t=j} 
) 
= 
n∑ t=1 
E ( χ{J̃t=j} 
) 
= 
n∑ t=1 
P ( J̃t = j 
) = np̃j . 
(16) 
Then, we can deduce exponential concentration by applying Hoeffdings inequality, which we will weaken into a polyno-mial concentration of the desired form. We have 
P ( T̃j(n) − np̃j ≥ n 
η z ) 
≤ e −2n2ηz2 
n (Hoeffdings ineq.) 
= 1 
e2n 2η−1z2 
≤ 1 
e2z2 (2η − 1 ≥ 0) 
≤ βT 
zξ . 
( ∀βT ≥ max 
z≥1 
zξ 
e2z2 
) (17) 
Hence, for any finite ξ > 0, we can choose βT large enough, such that the desired inequalities hold. Specifically any 
βT ≥ ξ ξ 2 2−ξe− 
ξ 2 (18) 
will suffice. The other direction follows analogously. Note that for large enough z any βT > 1 suffices, since zξ = O(e2z 
2 
) for any finite ξ > 0. 
Proof. (Theorem 3) From Lemma 1, we can deduce for j ∈ [K̃] that there exists some βT such that 
P ( T̃j(n) − np̃j ≥ 
nηz 
2RK̃ 
) ≤ 
βT( z 
2RK 
)ξ = βT 2ξRξKξ 
zξ , (19) 
which for z ≥ 2RK directly follows from Lemma 1 and for z ≤ 2RK trivially follows from the right hand side being greater than 1 since (2RK)ξ 
zξ ≥ 1 and βT > 1. Additionally, we can assume without loss of generality 
that we can choose the same constants for the bounds of T̃j(n) and Yj,n, i.e., β = βT since we can choose the larger 
one and both bounds will hold. We will, therefore, omit the subscript T to improve readability and use only β. 
Next, we show the concentration property of Theo-rem 3. Due to space constraints, we introduce the new vari-able Υ = 
∑K̃ j=1 T̃j(n)Yj,T̃j(n) 
. We start with the left-hand side of Equation (14). To obtain 2 new terms that we can treat separately, we transform it as follows: 
conc. = P ( nYn − nµ̃ ≥ n 
η z ) 
= P 
n 1 
n Υ − n 
K̃∑ j=1 
p̃j µ̃j ≥ n η z 
 
≤ P 
 
Υ − n 
K̃∑ j=1 
p̃j µ̃j ≥ n η z 
 ∩ 
K̃⋃ j=1 
{∣∣∣T̃j(n) − np̃j 
∣∣∣ ≥ nηz 
2RK̃ 
}  (I) 
+ P 
 
Υ − n K̃∑ 
j=1 
p̃j µ̃j ≥ n η z 
 ∩ 
K̃⋂ j=1 
{∣∣∣T̃j(n) − np̃j 
∣∣∣ ≤ nηz 
2RK̃ 
}  , (II) 
where the last inequality follows from the union bound. Now, we bound each term separately. For (I) again the union bound and Lemma 1 yield 
(I) = P 
 
Υ − n 
K̃∑ j=1 
p̃j µ̃j ≥ n η z 
 ∩ 
K̃⋃ j=1 
{∣∣∣T̃j(n) − np̃j 
∣∣∣ ≥ nηz 
2RK̃ 
}  
≤ K̃∑ 
j=1 
P 
 Υ − n 
K̃∑ j=1 
p̃j µ̃j ≥ n η z 
 ∩ {∣∣∣T̃j(n) − np̃j 
∣∣∣ ≥ nηz 
2RK̃ 
}  
≤ K̃∑ 
j=1 
P ({∣∣∣T̃j(n) − np̃j 
∣∣∣ ≥ nηz 
2RK̃ 
}) 
≤ 2K̃ β2ξRξK̃ξ 
zξ . 
(20) 
Before we establish the bound for (II), first note the follow-ing inequality 
n η ≥ 
∑K̃ j=1 T̃j(n) 
η 
K̃ . (21) 
This follows from n = ∑K̃ 
j=1 T̃j(n) and that the function f(x) = xη for positive x ∈ R+ and 1 
2 ≤ η < 1 is concave and monotonically increasing. Hence, we have 
f 
 K̃∑ j=1 
T̃j(n) 
 ≥ f 
 K̃∑ j=1 
1 
K̃ T̃j(n) 
 (mon. inc.) 
≥ 
∑K̃ j=1 f 
( T̃j(n) 
) K̃ 
. (concave) 
(22)
Now we establish the same bound for the term (II): 
(II) = P 
 
Υ − n 
K̃∑ j=1 
p̃j µ̃j ≥ n η z 
 ∩ 
K̃⋂ j=1 
{∣∣∣T̃j(n) − np̃j 
∣∣∣ ≤ nηz 
2RK̃ 
}  
≤ P 
Υ − K̃∑ 
j=1 
T̃j(n)µ̃j + K̃ nηz 
2RK̃ R ≥ n 
η z 
 (III) 
= P 
Υ − K̃∑ 
j=1 
T̃j(n)µ̃j ≥ nηz 
2 
 ≤ P 
Υ − K̃∑ 
j=1 
T̃j(n)µ̃j ≥ K̃∑ 
j=1 
T̃j(n) ηz 
2K̃ 
 (by Equation (21)) 
≤ K̃∑ 
j=1 
P ( T̃j(n) 
( Yj,T̃j(n) − µ̃j 
) ≥ 
T̃j(n) ηz 
2K̃ 
) (Union Bound) 
≤ K̃ βK̃ξ2ξ 
zξ (Conc. of Yj,T̃j(n)) 
≤ 2K̃ β2ξRξK̃ξ 
zξ . 
Here, the concentration of Yj,T̃j(n) is directly applicable for 
z 
2K̃ ≥ 1 and for z 
2K̃ < 1, it trivially follows from the right-
hand side being greater than 1, since then (2K̃)ξ 
zξ > 1 and β > 1. Additionally inequality (III) follows from∣∣∣T̃j(n) − np̃j 
∣∣∣ ≤ nηz 
2RK̃ and µ̃j ∈ [−R,R], ∀j ∈ [K̃] 
⇒ −np̃j µ̃j ≤ −T̃j(n)µ̃j + nηz 
2RK̃ R, ∀j ∈ [K̃] (23) 
⇒ − K̃∑ 
j=1 
np̃j µ̃j ≤ − K̃∑ 
j=1 
T̃j(n)µ̃j + K̃ nηz 
2RK̃ R. 
By combining both bounds, we obtain 
P ( nYn − nµ̃ ≥ n 
η z ) 
≤ 2 β2ξ+1RξK̃ξ+1 
zξ = 
β′ 
zξ′ , (24) 
where β′ := β 2ξ+2RξK̃ξ+1 > 1 and ξ′ := ξ > 0, 1 2 ≤ η′ := η < 1. The other direction follows analogously. 
Note that in this case, we do not need to show conver-gence separately since convergence in expectation follows from convergence in probability. 
Proof of Theorem 1. First, note that we can assume the same constants β′, ξ′, and η′ for the entire intermediate layer, i.e., ∀i ∈ [K], since we can choose the largest β′, making every inequality hold. Thus, we let β′ := β 2ξ+2Rξ maxi∈[K](Ki) 
ξ+1. We get the desired result by applying Theorems 2 and 3 successively. 
By assumption, we have {Xi j,t : t ∈ N},∀j ∈ [Ki],∀i ∈ 
[K] satisfy the convergence and concentration properties for constants β, ξ, η. By application of Theorem 3, it follows that {Xi,t : t ∈ N},∀i ∈ [K] satisfy the convergence and concentration properties for constants β′, ξ′, η′. Now Theo-rem 2 yields that {Xt : t ∈ N} satisfies the convergence and concentration properties for constants β′′, ξ′′, η′′, where the empirical average Xn concentrates around µi∗ , representing 
the converged empirical average of the best action with re-spect to the converged values {µi : i ∈ [K]}. 
The relationship between the constants at the root and the leaves can be summarized as follows: 
η ′′ 
= α 
ξ(1 − η) (25) 
ξ ′′ 
= α − 1 (26) 
β ′′ 
= max 
{ c2, 2c 
α−1 1 max 
{ β ′ , 
2(K − 1) 
(α − 1)(1 + A(Np))α−1 
}} (27) 
β ′ = β2 
ξ+2 R 
ξ max i∈[K] 
(Ki) ξ+1 (28) 
Here, the constants c1, c2, Np and the function A(t) were introduced by Shah, Xie, and Xu (2022) and are given by: 
c1 = 2RK( 2 
∆min 
β ′ 1 ξ ) 
1 1−η (29) 
c2 = 2R(Np − 1) 1− α 
ξ(1−η) (30) 
A(t) = 
⌈ ( 
2 
∆min 
β ′ 1 ξ ) 
1 1−η t 
α ξ(1−η) 
⌉ (31) 
Np =min t∈N 
t 
s.t. t ≥ max{1, A(t)} 
t ≤ (2R(3 + A(t) − 4K)) 1 η 
(32) 
Induction Over Layers To apply the results of Theorem 1 to trees, we first need to show that the assumptions of Theorem 1 are satisfied at the leaf level of the tree, from which we can then induc-tively follow, by successive application of Theorem 1, that the polynomial concentration is maintained throughout the entire tree up to the root. To this end, we observe the leaf level for the finite horizon H as follows. 
Induction Start At leaf level we observe stationary re-ward sequences {XH 
i,t : t ∈ N} that are independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.) for i ∈ [KH ]. Further, we assume the rewards are bounded within [−R,R]. We de-fine their empirical mean of the first n trials as XH 
i,n = 1 n 
∑n t=1 X 
H i,t and its expectation µH 
i,n := E ( XH 
i,n 
) . Then, 
we can state the following lemma: 
Lemma 2. The reward sequences at the leaf level satisfy the convergence and concentration properties: 
1. (Convergence): For every i ∈ [KH ] there exists µH i ∈ 
[−R,R] such that 
µ H i,n := E 
( X 
H i,n 
) n−→∞−−−−→ µ 
H i (33) 
2. (Concentration): There exist constants βH > 1, ξH > 0, 1 2 ≤ ηH < 1 such that for every z ∈ R with z ≥ 1 and n ∈ N we have 
P ( nX 
H i,n − nµ 
H i ≥ n 
ηH z 
) ≤ 
βH 
zξH , 
P ( nX 
H i,n − nµ 
H i ≤ −n 
ηH z 
) ≤ 
βH 
zξH . 
(34) 
Proof. Since the reward sequences are i.i.d., we can apply Hoeffdings inequality similar to the proof of Lemma 1 to
obtain a stronger result, which we then weaken to be in the desired form. Note that convergence follows trivially from 
µ H i,n = E 
( X 
H i,n 
) = 
1 
n 
n∑ t=1 
E ( X 
H i,t 
) (lin.) 
= E ( X 
H i,1 
) (i.i.d.) 
=: µ H i , ∀n ∈ N. 
(35) 
Now for z ∈ R with z ≥ 1 and n ∈ N, by applying Hoeffd-ings inequality, we obtain 
P ( nX 
H i,n − nµ 
H i ≥ n 
ηH z 
) 
≤ e − 2n2ηH 
z2 
n4R2 (Hoeffding: i.i.d. & X H i,t ∈ [−R,R]) 
= 1 
e n(2ηH−1)z2 
2R2 
≤ 1 
e z2 
2R2 
(2η H − 1 ≥ 0) 
≤ βH 
zξH . 
∀βH ≥ max z≥1 
zξH 
e z2 
2R2 
 (36) 
Hence, for any finite ξH > 0, 1 2 ≤ ηH < 1 we can choose 
βH > 1 large enough that the desired inequality holds. 
Specifically, any βH≥RξH (ξH) ξH 
2 e− ξH 
2 will suffice. Note that for large enough z any βT > 1 suffices, since 
zξ H 
= O ( e 
z2 
2R2 
) for any finite ξH > 0. 
Induction Step The induction step is precisely given by Theorem 1. As an induction hypothesis, we assume that some layer h ∈ {2, . . . ,H} satisfies the convergence and concentration properties for constants βh, ξh, ηh from which it follows by Theorem 1 that the next layer (h− 1) also sat-isfies the properties for derived constants βh−1, ξh−1, ηh−1 
according to Equations (25) to (27) and appropriate param-eter αh > 2 with ξhηh 
( 1− ηh 
) ≤ αh < ξh 
( 1− ηh 
) . 
Hence, for a finite horizon with bounded rewards, we can at-tain polynomial concentration and convergence throughout the whole tree up to the root of the search. Note that this inductive argument is equivalent to the deterministic case (Shah, Xie, and Xu 2022). 
Experimental Details For our small motivational experiment, we used the Frozen-Lake environment, which is explained in the following sub-section, with n ∈ {210, 211, 212, 213, 214} over 300 random seeds. The results can be seen in Figure 1. It displays the av-erage discounted return observed over the different seeds, in-cluding the standard error, against the number of simulations n. Further, Figure 3 shows the regret of MCTS for various n in state 14 (Figure 5 left of the present) and 10 random seeds. This plot is a more direct visualization of Theorem 1. Details about hyperparameters and the computing infrastructure are given later in this section. 
Figure 5: A screenshot of the FrozenLake environment showing the 4 × 4 map with the player at the start state, goal (present) and 4 holes. 
The FrozenLake Environment The FrozenLake environment is a Gymnasium environment (Towers et al. 2024). It offers four actions in every state: Left, Down, Right, and Up. With a probability of 1/3, the agent transitions as intended. Otherwise, they will move in one of the two perpendicular directions, each with a proba-bility of 1/3. The goal for the player is to reach the goal state in the lower right corner (Figure 5, present) to get a reward of 1, and the episode terminates. It always starts in the upper left corner. If it falls into a hole, the episode also terminates, with a reward of 0. All intermediate rewards are 0 as well. We use the 4 × 4 map and allow T = 400 time steps until the episode terminates, and a discount factor γ = 0.99. 
Hyperparameters Computing the exact constants is time-consuming in prac-tice. Therefore, we chose to follow the path of Shah, Xie, and Xu (2022) (η = 1/2 and α 
ξ = 1/4). Further, we selected 
β 1 ξ = 2 so that we get an exploration bonus of 
Bt,s = 2 
√√ t 
s . (37) 
We strongly believe this is sufficient to show the practical value of our theoretical contribution. 
Computational Infrastructure Our experiments were conducted on Google Colab1 using the Python 3 CPU runtime. 
1https://colab.research.google.com